[Amit Varma]: While chatting with my writing students the other day, I mentioned that I wished I had
[Amit Varma]: done such a course when I was in my early 20s. Now, I wasn't praising the course as
[Amit Varma]: much as I was making a confession about my past self. The 21-year-old Amit wanted to
[Amit Varma]: write, but knew nothing about writing. He didn't know the craft, and more importantly,
[Amit Varma]: he didn't know the importance of discipline, of building processes and writing habits.
[Amit Varma]: He thought he understood life and the world around him, but that was just the arrogance
[Amit Varma]: of youth. Like most people, I learnt whatever I know by making mistakes. Life gave me hard
[Amit Varma]: knocks, I learnt. But if I had read more, had more humility, I could have learnt faster.
[Amit Varma]: If the 47-year-old me could speak to the 21-year-old me, I could change his life, which leads us
[Amit Varma]: into complicated science fiction territory because a 47-year-old me may not exist then.
[Amit Varma]: But my point is this, life teaches all of us important lessons, but it's possible, with
[Amit Varma]: the right attitude, to take shortcuts, to learn those lessons from others and as a result,
[Amit Varma]: to live our lives better. That's why I find it important to constantly think about life
[Amit Varma]: and writing and creating and all the things I do, and to try and build a framework around
[Amit Varma]: whatever I have learnt, and to share that with others whenever I can. And the kind of
[Unknown]: people I love chatting with on this show are those who do just that.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Scene and the Unseen. My guest today is Prakash Iyer, who is a man of multiple
[Amit Varma]: careers, all of them successful. After doing an MBA in the early 1980s, he joined the corporate
[Amit Varma]: world, where he went on to hold top positions at Hindustan Lever and Pepsi, among others.
[Amit Varma]: As if being a corporate bigwig wasn't enough, he reinvented himself and became an author.
[Amit Varma]: Driven by the urge to share his learnings and his life lessons, he wrote a series of
[Amit Varma]: books, the latest of which is just out. It's called How Come No One Told Me That. And Prakash
[Amit Varma]: further reinvented himself to become a leadership coach, a public speaker, a YouTuber, a modern
[Amit Varma]: day creator. He is also an alteration tailor. What does that mean? You'll have to listen
[Amit Varma]: to this episode to find out. But first, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: Have you always wanted to be a writer, but never quite gotten down to it? Well, I'd love
[Amit Varma]: to help you. Over the last year, I've enjoyed teaching my online course, the art of clear
[Amit Varma]: writing, and an online community has now sprung up of all my past students. We have workshops,
[Amit Varma]: a newsletter to showcase the work of students and vibrant interaction with much stimulation.
[Amit Varma]: In the course itself, through four webinars spread out over four weekends, I share all
[Amit Varma]: I know about the craft and practice of clear writing. There are many exercises, much interaction
[Amit Varma]: and a lovely and lively community at the end of it. The course costs Rs 10,000 plus GST
[Amit Varma]: or about $150 and the September classes begin on the 4th of September. So if you're interested,
[Amit Varma]: head on over to register at indiauncut.com slash clear writing. That's indiauncut.com
[Amit Varma]: slash clear writing. Being a good writer doesn't require God given talent, just the willingness
[Amit Varma]: to work hard and a clear idea of what you need to do to refine your skills. I can help
[Guest]: you.
[Guest]: Prakash, welcome to the scene and the unseen. Thank you so much for having me here. It's
[Amit Varma]: such a pleasure to be with you. Yeah, I mean, your books are of course incredibly famous.
[Amit Varma]: I remember after you signed up for my course, some of the other participants were so surprised
[Amit Varma]: that hey, there's you know, it's like we signed up for Atul Berede's class and we get Sachin
[Amit Varma]: Tendulkar himself as one of the participants. So congratulations on your new book. But I'd
[Amit Varma]: like to start not by talking about your books, all the life lessons you've shared, but just
[Amit Varma]: your life to begin with, which is so incredibly fascinating to me that you spend all these
[Amit Varma]: years in the corporate world. And then you sort of become a leadership coach and you
[Amit Varma]: know, and in a sense transform just the way that you kind of look at the world and look
[Amit Varma]: at yourself. But take me back to your childhood. Where were you born? Where did you grow up?
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I know that you spend a certain part of your childhood in Jaipur where you learn
[Amit Varma]: to fly kites and you started learning leadership lessons from that point on when you were five
[Amit Varma]: years old. But in general, take me back to your childhood. Where did your dad work? What
[Amit Varma]: were your parents like? How was that childhood?
[Guest]: So yes, I was born in Jaipur, Amit. And my dad used to be working in a steel rolling
[Guest]: mill in Jaipur. And I was born in our house in Jaipur. And there's a little story attached
[Guest]: to that because we went back several years later with my wife and I showed her the house
[Guest]: where we were born. But I'll come to that some other time maybe. So I was born in Jaipur.
[Guest]: Dad used to be, you know, a huge influence on my life. As I look back, my father was
[Guest]: a huge influence. He left home when he was 18 from a small town called Perimbavur in
[Guest]: Kerala and came to Mumbai, Bombay at that time to work with the railways and came here
[Guest]: and then kind of educated himself and got a diploma in engineering. But more importantly,
[Guest]: here was this man who probably spoke only Tamil and Malayalam, who comes and a bit of
[Guest]: English perhaps at that time and comes to Bombay and learns Hindi and becomes so good
[Guest]: at it that he starts teaching Hindi at the Bombay Tamil Sangam, which is really meant
[Guest]: to help all these people who come from the south to work in Bombay and don't know Hindi.
[Guest]: So he's actually out there teaching Hindi. And I say this because in many ways, that's
[Guest]: a memory that kind of stays with me to say, wow, you know, it takes a certain kind of
[Guest]: person to do this. And as I look at myself and my children now, I wonder if we have the
[Guest]: ability to pick up languages like perhaps another generation did. A very nice and comfortable
[Guest]: childhood, very fond memories of flying kites, of going to school, of going to St. Xavier's
[Guest]: in Jaipur and having the headmaster look at my shoes and say, shining shoes. And I still
[Guest]: remember that. And I keep thinking that if you're in a meeting and if you're in anything
[Guest]: formal, hey, make sure your shoes are shining. We moved from Jaipur to Delhi to Bombay. My
[Guest]: father used to be in, was in private service, tried some business, which looked like the
[Guest]: best time of our life because suddenly we had like, you know, cars and we had bought
[Guest]: a house. But he was in business, which also meant that suddenly we found everything was
[Guest]: going away and, you know, tough times. But overall, very, very fond memories of growing
[Guest]: up, of time spent in Jaipur. Let me tell you a little other small memory that I have from
[Guest]: Jaipur again, which is my father used to be part of the Dakshin Bharatiya Samiti in Jaipur.
[Guest]: So one of the things they would do is these cultural events of some kind. And I remember
[Guest]: featuring in one of these little performances. It was a play which my dad had written. And
[Guest]: the whole thing was in Tamil, but it was songs sung in Tamil set to very popular Hindi film
[Guest]: music. So, you know, I played a Mantri in that little as a six-year-old or a five-year-old
[Guest]: at that time. And the song I had was set to the tune of, Chod Gaye Balam, Hai Mujhe, you
[Guest]: know, Saath Hamara Chod Gaye, whatever that song was, very popular Hindi songs. And I'm
[Guest]: saying this because as I now look at the things I've done in my life, I like this idea that
[Guest]: you can take a popular Hindi song and set it to Tamil lyrics and make it work. And that
[Guest]: you don't have to listen to a Hindi film song the way it was. So one of my favorite past
[Guest]: times as a young kid was to set, you know, to translate Hindi songs into English. So
[Guest]: I would sing very confidently, my life is a plain paper, plain it remained because,
[Guest]: you know, Mera jeevan kora kaagaz kora hi reh gaya. And maybe I'm trying to attribute
[Guest]: too much to it, but it perhaps got me started on this journey of not of looking at things
[Guest]: and saying, maybe there's another interesting way to do it. Maybe there's something else
[Guest]: happening over here. And my father, as you might have guessed by now, because he did
[Guest]: theater and stuff like that. So he was, you know, he was fairly creative in many senses.
[Guest]: He got me onto this journey of, of let's say, feeling confident about being in an elocution
[Guest]: contest in school or being in a debate in school. And that again, gave me the confidence
[Guest]: to say, maybe this is something that I can do reasonably well. And I still remember as
[Guest]: a little kid, I would write letters to the editor. And in those days, there used to be
[Guest]: sports week. And I would write like this, you know, superbly creative piece of work,
[Guest]: which would be something like, you know, congratulations, Sunny for scoring a ton at Melbourne, keep
[Guest]: it up. And guess what, you know, God bless Khaled Ansari, he would actually publish it
[Guest]: in sports week. And I would find that my name was appearing in that last page, you know,
[Guest]: with those three lines attributed to me, I would be walking up to a newspaper stall in
[Guest]: Mumbai. And I would actually sneakily peek into the last page of sports week before deciding
[Guest]: whether I want to spend a rupee on buying it. And if my name was there, I would pick
[Guest]: it up and I would come home. And I think my parents felt so good. But at least my recall
[Guest]: is my parents said, wow, what a good thing. And if there was a guest at home, they would
[Guest]: show that to people to say, hey, look, here's something that our son has written. And maybe
[Guest]: these things got me interested, excited. So I'd write a bit, went to school, I, you know,
[Guest]: would be would debate a fair bit and did reasonably well at that, would write essays in school.
[Guest]: And again, and I'm just looking back to say that as you write an essay, and I remember
[Guest]: class eight or nine, we were asked to write an essay about a person I admire. Okay, and
[Guest]: so you can imagine most essays in class were like, you know, Mahatma Gandhi or stuff like
[Guest]: that. And here I am, I wrote about my brother, my older brother, as the person I admire.
[Guest]: And the teacher thought it was pretty cool. My parents thought it was pretty cool. My
[Guest]: brother, of course, thought it was very, very cool. And these, I guess, were interesting
[Guest]: memories for me, did reasonably well in school. And when I was graduating, here's another
[Guest]: memory. My physics teacher, a kind gentleman called Mr. Venugopal, he, you know, sees says
[Guest]: well done and, you know, I've done reasonably well in school. And so he says, so what are
[Guest]: you going to do now? Now, if you're a South Indian boy from a middle class home, and you've
[Guest]: done reasonably well at school, it's a given that you have to do science and then become
[Guest]: an engineer or a doctor. I mean, you cannot think of anything else. And I remember my
[Guest]: physics teacher telling me, I think you should do arts. Okay, but I'm now this is what 1977,
[Guest]: you don't do arts. Arts is for those, you know, especially if you live in Bombay, maybe
[Guest]: if you lived in Delhi, there's a St. Stephen's and you start thinking of stuff like that,
[Guest]: but it never even crossed my mind or within the family to say I should do arts. I did
[Guest]: science quickly figured that engineering is not the kind of thing I want to do, but luckily
[Guest]: found statistics and loved it. So I actually did a BSc, which would have more arts courses
[Guest]: than science. I did economics, statistics and math. And really, as I look back, I think
[Guest]: one of the better things I did in my life was to have done statistics in college because
[Guest]: I think it's hugely useful as a skill to have as compared to perhaps doing several other
[Guest]: things you could do. So that's like a, you know, a quick recap of what early years in
[Amit Varma]: my life might have been. Yeah, many, many strands I want to follow up on. And one of
[Amit Varma]: them which comes to mind is, you know, when you describe your father sort of migrating
[Amit Varma]: to the north from Kerala, and then learning Hindi and then teaching Hindi to his community.
[Amit Varma]: And it seems to me that there is a sort of the best aspect of how we can think about
[Amit Varma]: community in India, that you go somewhere else, but you're not insular when you connect
[Amit Varma]: with your community. Instead, you help them adapt to what the wider society which in his
[Amit Varma]: case he did by teaching Hindi or by you know, having those interesting crossover musical
[Amit Varma]: experiments, and so on and so forth. And in recent times, especially there is also an
[Amit Varma]: uglier side to it. Like, of course, this side of it is also a side that lends itself well
[Amit Varma]: to globalization. And we see it all across the world where our identities are broadening
[Amit Varma]: in the sense that we hold on to those aspects of our past with pride and with joy, but also
[Amit Varma]: we open ourselves to the outside world. But equally in our modern politics, there is also
[Amit Varma]: this strain of becoming more and more insular of these sort of divisions kind of sharpening.
[Amit Varma]: Now in your experience from the 70s, 80s, 90s to now, when you look back on this entire
[Amit Varma]: span of time, what is your sense of the movement of things? Like, you know, when I look at
[Amit Varma]: the way that I grew up, probably a decade younger than you or so, and when I look at
[Amit Varma]: the way that I grew up, it was a very cloistered, elite English speaking kind of existence where
[Amit Varma]: you received the idea of India was all of these sort of feel good, Nehruvian things
[Amit Varma]: and all of that. But today, it seems that the reality all along may have been something
[Amit Varma]: else entirely. What is your sense of that? Because what your work also took you out into
[Amit Varma]: doing was just interacting with a lot of people who were outside your immediate social circles,
[Amit Varma]: per se, and in the kind of marketing roles that you would have done in companies like
[Amit Varma]: HLL. Also, therefore, having to understand kind of the pulse of the country. Have we
[Amit Varma]: changed fundamentally? Were we always like this? And were we missing something then?
[Guest]: What are your sort of observations? As I look back, maybe there are two things
[Guest]: that are happening or two things that come to my mind. The first, of course, is I think
[Guest]: childhood influences, parental influences, I think are very strong for all of us. And
[Guest]: I'd like to believe that a lot of the way I might look at the world, the way I might
[Guest]: have seen things was born out of what I might have seen at home. And in that sense, I guess
[Guest]: I was lucky that whatever is the lottery that we are all supposed to have been lucky at
[Guest]: in terms of saying that, you know, we were lucky to be born where we were. And I think
[Guest]: it's been a privilege that I think has a huge impact. And as I look at a lot of other people,
[Guest]: I've often felt that you come across people who are probably much smarter, have had far
[Guest]: more opportunities to do great things in life, but perhaps missed out on some of those early
[Guest]: lessons on staying grounded, on respecting other people, on valuing differences of opinion
[Guest]: and not trying to, you know, foist your views onto everybody else. And maybe that's something
[Guest]: that has had an impact. I certainly think that it was a much nicer, easier world. And
[Guest]: even if I look at it from a professional standpoint, my early career was spent in sales. And therefore,
[Guest]: a large part of the early years would mean going to Tirupur and selling something or
[Guest]: going to Asansol and trying to sell more Pepsi or soap or whatever it was. What that does
[Guest]: is it just opens your eyes to the diversity of the country. People are different. You
[Guest]: learn not to stereotype people. You learn not to prejudge. And you often realize that
[Guest]: now that you are in Saharanpur or, you know, God forbid, you are in, you know, in the neck
[Guest]: of the woods in Azamgarh, you suddenly realize that you are actually at the mercy of your
[Guest]: distributor or your salesperson. And you better learn to respect who they are and what they
[Guest]: do. And you can't be expecting them to be like you or to necessarily say that, look,
[Guest]: I'm senior, I will tell you what to do. So I think it builds a sense of, I'm not, I think
[Guest]: modesty is the right word, but a sense of just appreciating the fact that you may be
[Guest]: who you are, but learn to value other people, learn to value what they might bring to the
[Guest]: table. And very often what they bring to the table is not a function of how much, which
[Guest]: college they went to or what level of seniority they might have in the organization. So I
[Guest]: think that's something else that's become very strong for me. And I sometimes worry
[Guest]: that as we become more and more insular, as we start to think or spend more time in echo
[Guest]: chambers with people like ourselves, we start to imagine that that's the world and that
[Guest]: we have all the answers and that's the way everybody is. And we forget that there's actually
[Guest]: still a large part of our country, a large part of our people who are very, very different.
[Guest]: Something else, Amit, that might be interesting here is that my kids, and I often think about
[Guest]: my children, and they went to 11 schools by the time they finished class 10. And this
[Guest]: is largely because I was enrolled, which required me to move from one city to another, to another.
[Guest]: And every time we moved, the wife was pretty clear, the kids, the family will move with
[Guest]: me. So it was never an option to say, oh my goodness, we've just come here, you go, we'll
[Guest]: stay here. So there was a feeling that as a family, we must stay together, which again,
[Guest]: feels a bit like maybe an outdated, more or a value to say, hey, why did you do that?
[Guest]: You know, your kids could have spent their time in one school, maybe they would have
[Guest]: done better, got better grades, probably got into an IIT, which they didn't. But as I look
[Guest]: back, I think it's a good thing. And the kids think it's a damn good thing. They had to
[Guest]: make new friends every year, they were in a new school every year. And I think they
[Guest]: just learned to adjust a lot more, a lot better. And to me, that's a fabulous skill to have.
[Guest]: This ability to say, I'll go anywhere, I'll still make new friends. I don't have to worry
[Guest]: about, oh my goodness, this has changed. This is not how it used to be. And maybe there's
[Amit Varma]: value in that too.
[Guest]: That's a very interesting observation. So how old are your kids? What do they do now?
[Guest]: They're twins, Amit. They are 31 and therefore 31. And they both work. My daughter works
[Guest]: in HR with OYO, with the OYO hotel group. And my son is with Star Sports. He does marketing
[Guest]: for the Kabaddi League.
[Amit Varma]: Oh, okay. So the same kind of love for sports as you had. So a few interesting strands from
[Amit Varma]: what you were speaking about earlier. Like one, obviously that, hey, you were a South
[Amit Varma]: Indian boy, good at science, good at studies, all of that. You were expected to do engineering,
[Amit Varma]: become an engineer or a doctor, etc, etc. All of those things. Or maybe the IAS has
[Amit Varma]: a fallback option, but you chose a private sector.
[Amit Varma]: Another interesting thing here is that today it's perfectly natural for everybody to want
[Amit Varma]: a job in a multinational and so on and so forth. But back in the day, from what I remember,
[Amit Varma]: it wasn't. It was almost kind of looked upon with suspicion. And you know, the respectable
[Amit Varma]: professions are the ones we spoke about, doctor, engineer, IAS, and so on. People would spend
[Amit Varma]: years and years giving entrance exam after entrance exam for the UPLC. And I also did
[Amit Varma]: arts by the way in college, which was also looked upon at that time, as a very unusual
[Amit Varma]: decision. And people were like, oh, you're only doing it because your class will be full
[Amit Varma]: of girls, which which it was that the ratio even in the late 80s, when I opted for that
[Amit Varma]: was kind of like that. So how did the choice to then you know, enter the private sector
[Amit Varma]: and do all of that kind of come about as it did? Was it easier for you? Because you did
[Amit Varma]: not have that ingrained sort of sense of hierarchy as as in the rest of society where the private
[Amit Varma]: sector comes low down because your dad after all was an entrepreneur and did all of these
[Amit Varma]: things. How did that shift happen in your life?
[Guest]: I'm not sure if I can find a moment in time. It's probably a continuum of saying that my
[Guest]: parents probably felt that, hey, here's a kid who seems to be doing all right, seems
[Guest]: to be enjoying what he's doing. When I was in college in Bombay, I spent afternoons writing
[Guest]: copy for an ad agency. There was a fairly strong interest in advertising as a possible
[Guest]: career. And therefore, maybe that might have in some sense led me to think of heroes. And
[Guest]: I remember going to an ad club Bombay meeting where I suddenly see there's a guy called
[Guest]: Arun Nanda, who at that time looked like, you know, was really very hot. Rediff Fusion,
[Guest]: which is the agency started was was making waves. And I also happened to hear the then
[Guest]: marketing director of Hindustan Lever, a guy called Shunnu Sen. He and he was speaking
[Guest]: at an event and he was so funny and he had so much knowledge coming out of everything
[Guest]: that he was saying. He was funny. He was interesting. And suddenly, maybe at some level, you start
[Guest]: thinking of these people and saying, I think there's a hero I can see over here or there's
[Guest]: a role model that I might want to kind of follow in the footsteps off. And then an MBA
[Guest]: looked like an interesting thing to do at that stage. And one got familiar with the
[Guest]: fact that if you were in school and college at that time, so in Mumbai particularly, I
[Guest]: think there was a fair bit of noise around saying MBA could be an interesting option.
[Guest]: And that's how I guess I got into into business school and having gotten to business school
[Guest]: then and then Hindustan Levers, which is the first company that I, you know, that I went
[Guest]: to work with, became a natural progression to say, if you want to do sales and marketing
[Guest]: and if you get a chance to work with Hindustan Lever, take it. And maybe I must tell you
[Guest]: a little sidelight here, Amit, which is again, how perhaps some of our decisions in life
[Guest]: are. I mentioned, I went and wrote copy for an ad agency and I really enjoyed it. And
[Guest]: I love the fact that I would do something which would then appear in midday the next
[Guest]: evening or whatever. At the Institute, I had spent my summer working with Hindustan Lever
[Guest]: and there was a reasonable chance that if I had done a reasonable job, I might have
[Guest]: got to get a chance to work with them again. But I was very keen to look at advertising
[Guest]: as an option. And David Ogilvie was this God for me. And I said, I want to work with Ogilvie.
[Guest]: But Ogilvie wasn't an agency that would come on campus. So what do I do? I actually write
[Guest]: to a gentleman called Mani Iyer, spelled with an A-Y-E-R, who used to run Ogilvie at that
[Guest]: time and tell him that I want to, I'd love to work for, in advertising and I'd love to
[Guest]: work with Ogilvie. And this is days of snail mail. So I've sent it off and nothing happens
[Guest]: and you don't lose heart. Unlike in current days, where if you don't get a response within
[Guest]: a few hours, you start thinking, you know, maybe the guy's not interested. But after
[Guest]: a couple of weeks, I get a response saying, you know, great, why don't you come and see
[Guest]: me? And I say, you know, I can only come on a weekend, because I have classes through
[Guest]: the week. And he says, come. So Saturday morning, 11 o'clock at his residence. And I go and
[Guest]: meet him. And long story short, four weeks later, I get a letter from Ogilvie saying
[Guest]: that we'd love to hire you into the agency. And around that time, I've also now got into
[Guest]: placement season at Ahmedabad and I get Hindustan Lever. And you know what the clincher might
[Guest]: have been for me? Two things. The more public view was that I thought to myself that, hey,
[Guest]: Arun Nanda went to Hindustan Lever first and then started Rediffusion. So maybe that's
[Guest]: the route to take. Go into Hindustan Lever, work there and then get into advertising whenever
[Guest]: you want to. The actual big reason was that Ogilvie wouldn't give me housing. And living
[Guest]: in Bombay on 1800 rupees a month would have been a challenge. Whereas Hindustan Lever
[Guest]: have these chamaris and even as a young manager, you would get a place to stay. And that suddenly
[Guest]: looked like a pretty solid reason to say maybe Hindustan Lever is a good place to go to get
[Guest]: started and then you can always try and make a move later on. But I've often felt that,
[Guest]: you know, advertising is that that bus that I let go off, which, you know, I might have
[Guest]: enjoyed being in.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, that's the counterfactual is always interesting. You make these small decisions
[Amit Varma]: and suddenly, you know, 30 years later, you wonder what your life would have been if you
[Amit Varma]: had kind of taken the other one. So you're kind of one of the early MBAs, in a sense,
[Amit Varma]: you went to IIMA, right? So, which is pretty elite right now, but was even way more elite
[Amit Varma]: back then because there were sort of so few places in India where you could do an MBA.
[Amit Varma]: And one of the things that they say is that the big deal about going to an elite management
[Amit Varma]: school is not just what you learn, but also the networks that you form. So the question
[Amit Varma]: that just comes to my mind now is, when you look back at your classmates and all of that,
[Amit Varma]: is there some truth to that? Where are they all? Was it an exceptionally bright one just
[Amit Varma]: because of the selection effect that, you know, so few people actually get in there?
[Guest]: Yeah. So certainly, I think one of the highlights of being in an institute like that is the
[Guest]: kind of people you get to spend time with, the people you find yourself in the company
[Guest]: of. And for me, that's been a huge part of my life. I must add that a batch senior to
[Guest]: mine was also a fabulous batch. And I made lots of friends with people out there as much
[Guest]: as I might have with people in my own batch or the batch junior to mine. So that's really,
[Guest]: you get to interact with three sets of people. It's very humbling, Amit, at one level, you
[Guest]: get into a place like that and you think, it's natural to think you might have arrived
[Guest]: that wow. And then you promptly get into a course called Maths and Stats for Management
[Guest]: and you get a D and you realize that, hey, this is going to be tough. And if you thought
[Guest]: getting in was tough, getting out might actually be tougher. And that starts to kind of hit
[Guest]: you. But Ahmedabad was also a place where I suddenly realized that everybody has their
[Guest]: own strengths and I would never be, I could not have become a topper at Ahmedabad. I figured
[Guest]: that pretty quickly, but I also figured that, you know what, there's a great idea we've
[Guest]: got going here, which is to start a Sunday morning rag on campus. And we started something
[Guest]: called Synchrony and, you know, with a couple of seniors and a couple of us from my batch
[Guest]: and we started it. And suddenly, Prakash here, along with a few other people, was not just
[Guest]: one of those middling people in class, but was actually the guy who brought out that
[Guest]: rag, which everybody tried to make fun of, but couldn't pick up, couldn't stop themselves
[Guest]: from picking up and reading because they were all worried, what would we say about them
[Guest]: or what were we saying about something else? So I think in some ways, Ahmedabad also taught
[Guest]: me that there are lots of smart people in this world and you learn from a lot of them.
[Guest]: They'll challenge you, they'll push you to do better. But at the end of it, we all have
[Guest]: something about ourselves that we shouldn't lose sight of. And just playing to your strengths
[Guest]: can become, you know, can become a route, a ticket to success and happiness too. So
[Guest]: I could have spent those two years wishing that I was in the top 15 or I was in the top
[Guest]: 10 or, you know, I was a scholar. Now I scoll as they call them. I wasn't, but I have lots
[Guest]: to look back and say, wow, I made some fantastic friends. I managed to do a bit of writing.
[Guest]: In those days, I would write for the Sunday Observer. And that was pretty cool again.
[Guest]: So suddenly you'd find outside the classroom on a Monday, there's a newspaper cutting put
[Guest]: up on the notice board where usually you would have grades and all those people who've done
[Guest]: cool work at work, but you'd also find some chappie who's written a piece for Sunday Observer.
[Guest]: So I think as I look back, fond memories, but surely humbling. And to your point, does
[Guest]: the network matter? I think it matters at two levels. One, I think it inspires you.
[Guest]: You see a lot of people and there are some people who've done extremely well for themselves
[Guest]: and you feel, wow, so good about it. You learn another lesson, which is that there isn't
[Guest]: a very strong correlation between those rankings at the end of your business school and how
[Guest]: people might have done for themselves in their lives. There are, of course, a few people
[Guest]: who have managed to continue to kind of do extremely well, but there are enough examples
[Guest]: of people who will surprise you. People who might have been at the tail of the class at
[Guest]: some level, but who go on to do extremely well in the corporate world or indeed as entrepreneurs.
[Guest]: So that's something else that's an interesting lesson to keep.
[Amit Varma]: And another strand I want to pick up on is you said earlier that you're very glad you
[Amit Varma]: did statistics, that it made a very big difference. And it also kind of strikes me in my own life
[Amit Varma]: that I wish I had studied math much earlier because I think, you know, I began to apply
[Amit Varma]: mathematical principles and think of the world using math only after I became a professional
[Amit Varma]: poker player in some ways. And that kind of taught me a lot of humility. It improved my
[Amit Varma]: decision making, it just made me a different kind of person. Because once you internalize
[Amit Varma]: some of those lessons, and especially most importantly, the probabilistic way of thinking,
[Amit Varma]: which teaches you something that is a big part of even this book of yours, the whole
[Amit Varma]: lesson of humility, where you know, you realize how much of your whatever has happened in
[Amit Varma]: your life is determined by luck. So you don't let you know, you don't let your successes
[Amit Varma]: get to your head, you don't let your failures get you down. As I kind of keep stressing,
[Amit Varma]: I'm intrigued by what are the many different aspects in which you meant when you said,
[Amit Varma]: you know, learning statistics made a big impact on you.
[Guest]: As I think of what else I could have done, and I'm just thinking of it. A lot of the
[Guest]: stuff that you might otherwise learn in a science curriculum doesn't necessarily find
[Guest]: application in day to day work, unless you get to work on that specific science. So for
[Guest]: instance, if you did chemistry, and you went to work with organics or chemicals, you would
[Guest]: apply some of this some of the stuff that you might have learned in chemistry, in the
[Guest]: work that you do. I think statistics is probably a slightly more universal subject, and has
[Guest]: application across potential jobs, industries, and it's it's almost agnostic to which industry
[Guest]: you might be in learning the principles of probability. And perhaps more than just the
[Guest]: principles are trying to say, do I understand how I might calculate the probability, I think
[Guest]: learning to think with numbers, learning to think on the on what could go wrong, understanding
[Guest]: probability, understanding why 10 tosses of a coin and what happens when you do a 10 times,
[Guest]: you know, and what how people might actually make mistakes in their in their thinking around
[Guest]: around something as simple as that. I think that's, that's really what I think has been
[Guest]: very, very useful. It also makes you comfortable with numbers. And I, I still say this, and
[Guest]: I say this to everybody that no matter what you do, it's a good idea to get comfortable
[Guest]: with numbers. And this is not to suggest that all of us have to be have supremely solid
[Guest]: numeric ability or any such thing, but just being comfortable with numbers is a is a fabulous
[Guest]: life skill to have. And then to be able to think in numbers and to think in probability
[Guest]: and to have that, not have to consciously dive into it to say, oh, I know what to do.
[Guest]: I remember reading this in a textbook in statistics, or this was in my second year in statistics.
[Guest]: But just having that at the back of your mind, as a process or a structure that just kind
[Guest]: of becomes default, and allows you to think, you know, and I think that's useful whether
[Guest]: you're driving a car and trying to take a turn into a blind alley or taking decisions
[Guest]: in business or evaluating, you know, should we buy this business or not? Should we sell
[Guest]: it or not? You know, do we hire? I think everything that you do, there is an element of statistics
[Guest]: and probability that can come in. So that's how I think it's usually valuable.
[Amit Varma]: So you've already kind of mentioned the chamarys, which were the deciding factor in your choosing
[Amit Varma]: HLL over Ogilvy. So tell me more about your time at HLL. Like, what were the impressions
[Amit Varma]: you went in with? What were your early learnings? Like one of the things that I love about your
[Amit Varma]: books is that they're peppered with stories from your own life, which carry all of these
[Amit Varma]: excellent lessons. But it strikes me that a lot of this is you looking back and in hindsight,
[Amit Varma]: being able to draw these lessons out from what happened to you back then. But what were
[Amit Varma]: you actually learning back then in real time? Like if you had to look back on, say, the
[Amit Varma]: big TIL moments on your early years in HLL, you know, what were they like? Tell me a bit
[Amit Varma]: about those.
[Guest]: So the first one that I learned was that if someone says TIL and you don't know, today
[Guest]: I learned is what it stands for, ask. So, you know, never take it for granted. And I
[Guest]: think you get comfortable with saying that there'll be lots of jargon thrown around.
[Guest]: There'll be words being thrown around. If you don't know, just ask and get comfortable
[Guest]: with not knowing. I think a lot of the early years in Levers were also about understanding
[Guest]: the reality of a marketplace, understanding the power and dignity of a sales profession.
[Guest]: If you went to business school and you wanted to be a marketing person, and I often talk
[Guest]: about this, I thought that I would get into Hindustan Lever and have this great opportunity
[Guest]: to decide advertising campaigns and be out there winning an ad club award. And I go into
[Guest]: Hindustan Lever and they send me off to sell soap in small town Tamil Nadu and just going
[Guest]: out there and living on 26 rupees a day allowances, staying in hotels or lodges, which would cost
[Guest]: like 13 rupees, which is where your salesman stayed and learning to live like a salesman,
[Guest]: work like a salesman, travel like a salesman. I think it was very, very powerful. So at
[Guest]: one level, there was disappointment because after six months, your investment banker friend
[Guest]: was talking about how, you know, it's the airport in Singapore is so nice. The internet
[Guest]: is, you know, I don't even know if the internet was there, but, you know, they're talking
[Guest]: about international travel, boardrooms, big deals, and you're talking about, you know,
[Guest]: how the distributor in Pollachi is going bust and what do you do about it? And you start
[Guest]: wondering, do I really need to learn this? Is this what I went to business school for?
[Guest]: To be out there in Pollachi selling soap? It teaches you that, look, that's very important.
[Guest]: Once you get that bit right, once you understand what's actually happening in the marketplace,
[Guest]: once you understand what does a salesperson do, how do consumers buy our products in stores?
[Guest]: If you understand that, then that stays with you for the rest of your life. And as you
[Guest]: start to make bigger decisions and you start trying to formulate strategy, those strategies
[Guest]: and decisions are founded on fairly robust basics. And I think that's a powerful lesson
[Guest]: that I might've got out of Hindustan Lever, just to understand how business really operates.
[Guest]: Something else that influenced me at Hindustan Lever is how the management trainee program
[Guest]: at Hindustan Lever sends you through various functions. Six months after being out there
[Guest]: selling soap, you suddenly find yourself in a soap factory trying to understand how is
[Guest]: soap manufactured. You then find yourself in a role where you're playing, you know,
[Guest]: you're calling up truckers and saying, you know, I need six trucks and no, no, I want
[Guest]: a seventh one today, it's the last day of the month, have to dispatch. And then negotiating
[Guest]: with him to say, give me that same price, don't charge me more. And then you suddenly
[Guest]: find yourself spending two months in a small town in UP, in a village in UP, in Ita district,
[Guest]: where Hindustan Lever used to do a lot of rural development work. So the expectation
[Guest]: was that all of us as young management trainees will go out there and make a difference to
[Guest]: the people in that village. And just spending eight weeks in a village, living in that village
[Guest]: with the village dairy head who used to handle our milk business for us over there, carrying
[Guest]: a little can, not even a dalda can, smaller one actually, and going into the field every
[Guest]: morning. It teaches you a lot about what's happening and how a large part of our country
[Guest]: lives. Again, very, very powerful. Hindustan Lever also, you know, gave me the foundation
[Guest]: to say that understand how things work. And sometimes the benefit of being in a large
[Guest]: organization like Lever's was that you saw great processes at work. You saw good people
[Guest]: operating them. And therefore you suddenly understood what gold standard looks like.
[Guest]: And perhaps later in my life, it's easy to start saying, you know, yeah, but the people
[Guest]: here are not as good or they're not as smart. But you learn to work with what you have,
[Guest]: but you also learn the importance of then putting in place good systems, robust systems,
[Guest]: which will then stand you in good stead. And I think that's something else that I might
[Guest]: have learned over there. I also, of course, learned another lesson. So I used to be brand
[Guest]: manager on Sunlight in my early years. And it was interesting. And in those days, Piyush
[Guest]: Pandey used to be our creative person from Ogilvy who would be coming in and telling
[Guest]: us about, you know, aur phir kya hoga, you know, and then he'd tell. So here are the
[Guest]: two interesting things that I learned from Piyush. One, of course, is that as a creative
[Guest]: person, he would only think in Hindi, you know, and everything that he told you was
[Guest]: in Hindi. And here you were thinking, this is my positioning statement. This is my advertising
[Guest]: brief. And this is what I'm saying. And it was fascinating to see someone turn all of
[Guest]: that into saying, hey, this is what it does. And I still remember a simple thing. I'll
[Guest]: give you an example. On Sunlight, we were trying to say how we are very good for colors,
[Guest]: you know, and how typically, therefore, the problem we had understood was that if you
[Guest]: use detergent on colored clothes, over time, colors fade. And then, you know, you feel
[Guest]: that, look, this is not a good detergent. And with Sunlight, we said, we've put color
[Guest]: guard in it, so it'll protect your colors. And guess what Piyush comes and tells us,
[Guest]: you know, and he says, yaad hai hum kaise karte the same pinch. Agar maine neeli shirt
[Guest]: pehni hai aur aapne neeli shirt pehni hai, and I'll say, same pinch. And she said, haan,
[Guest]: aapne bhi kal khari thi, nahi nahi meri shirt, toh yeh chaar saal purani hai. So, same pinch
[Guest]: with Sunlight, because even though your shirt is four years old, it still looks like new.
[Guest]: Okay. And I think it was so fascinating for me as a young kid to see somebody turn a brief,
[Guest]: a fairly boring brief, I might have thought, into a creative idea, to think in local, into
[Guest]: in the vernacular, to think in local idiom. Again, I think gives you, allows you a chance
[Guest]: to respect a lot of other people who do things very differently from you, but do them well.
[Amit Varma]: On the one hand, it's kind of interesting that, you know, you learn statistics, and
[Amit Varma]: a big company, if you're looking at a top down view, would look at all of its market
[Amit Varma]: as basically numbers. And what this experience does is that it helps you humanize the numbers
[Amit Varma]: and get much deeper insight into what they actually mean and what they come from. As
[Amit Varma]: you rise up the ladder, number one, do you find that that stays with most people? Or
[Amit Varma]: once they get more and more away from it, the thinking kind of goes back to thinking
[Amit Varma]: broadly in numbers again, like, does one have to remind oneself all the time that that the
[Amit Varma]: market out there isn't homogenous, that every individual is different, that some of the
[Amit Varma]: things that you speak about in your book that don't make assumptions, you know, always look
[Amit Varma]: for new explanations and new sort of ways to do things.
[Guest]: So good leaders, I think, learn to do that. And as you see other good leaders in action,
[Guest]: you probably learn to do that. I again go back perhaps to early influences. And I think
[Guest]: it was an important grounding for leaders in Hindustan Lever or in Unilever, that you
[Guest]: had to spend those first few months or first year out there with salespeople understanding
[Guest]: how it works. And that tells you that there is a reality out there which might be different
[Guest]: from what you might have assumed. And I think that stays with you. And it's probably one
[Guest]: of those good practices that companies like Unilever have that even now, the chairman
[Guest]: of that company will go on market visits, will go out and will not go in thinking he
[Guest]: knows the answers. He will go in saying, I don't know, tell me what's happening. And
[Guest]: he'll want to learn from what's happening over there. And I think having both an open
[Guest]: mind not having assumed that you have all the answers, recognising that I want to learn,
[Guest]: that I don't know, I want to learn. And third, also recognising that the world is changing
[Guest]: very, very quickly. And what you might have thought, you know, oh, I know this, I've done
[Guest]: this before, I was there, right? Just doesn't work. And you will discover that if you thought
[Guest]: like that, you will suddenly discover that you missed the bus, but you assumed that people
[Guest]: were still stuck in shopping the way they were. And you don't realise that your maid
[Guest]: is actually now saying, I bought this on Amazon. So if she's doing that, she's no longer saying,
[Guest]: I don't understand digital or I don't, I have to go back to my neighbourhood kirana store.
[Guest]: The world is changing and changing rapidly. And just being aware of that, I think helps.
[Guest]: Amit, I must also add, maybe there's something else about, you know, sometimes it also helps
[Guest]: to be not the smartest guy in class or, you know, and I don't think I, so like I said,
[Guest]: when I was in Ahmedabad, I was a middling kind of person. And then when I went to Hindustan
[Guest]: Deewar, someone one year, my junior was a man who I thought was such a bright guy, you
[Guest]: know, fantastic. I went on to actually become chairman of Hindustan Deewar, great guy. And
[Guest]: I think you learn to respect people for their abilities, their skills. And you also tell
[Guest]: yourself that there's space for everybody. There's room for all of us. You don't have
[Guest]: to grudge people their successes or their greatness. You can in fact celebrate along
[Guest]: with them and feel good about it. And actually you can learn a little bit by just looking
[Guest]: at other people and saying, hmm, what might I learn from this person? And maybe it helps
[Guest]: to not have been on the top of the ladder as it were very early and then say, look,
[Guest]: I know it all. So maybe that's just a natural corollary of that.
[Amit Varma]: You were mentioning working with Piyush Pandey on your advertising. And that reminded me
[Amit Varma]: of one of the most delightful anecdotes in your book, where you talk about how as a young
[Amit Varma]: brand manager, when you would interact with the advertising team, you would always be
[Amit Varma]: saying isko zyada blue karo, isko tinker karo, font aisa karo, all of those kind of things.
[Amit Varma]: And at one point, your boss kind of called you in and said that, listen, don't do this.
[Amit Varma]: Your job is just to create a brief, they are specialists, they know what they are doing
[Amit Varma]: better than you do. And then this beautiful quote, where he said, quote, why keep a dog
[Amit Varma]: and bark yourself, a stop quote. And that's lovely. And what this story also tells us
[Amit Varma]: with great humility is a little bit about your own journey of learning to get past that
[Amit Varma]: youthful hubris, where on the one hand, and I say this, because it perhaps took me longer
[Amit Varma]: than you to get past it myself, where on one hand, you have that hubris that I'm so bloody
[Amit Varma]: good, there's that thing of I'm so good, and I can do this. And that's a Dunning-Kruger
[Amit Varma]: effect at work at one level. At another level, it's a level of you have power over people,
[Amit Varma]: right. And therefore, at some level, you want to tell them what to do, because you're the
[Amit Varma]: one with the power, you want to tell them you want to show your authority. And that
[Amit Varma]: lesson which you pointed out in your own life is sort of about stepping out of the way.
[Amit Varma]: You know, when you look back on the young Prakash Iyer, the young version of you, what
[Amit Varma]: were the things that changed in him on this journey, especially in the early years, and
[Amit Varma]: made him eventually the person that you are today?
[Guest]: I think a lot of a lot of lessons learned early in life, and maybe I was kind of built
[Guest]: in a way by which I said, let me try and learn this or let me try and understand how can
[Guest]: I get better on this one. And you're right, maybe it's it's a lot more of now looking
[Guest]: back and thinking that, wow, that's something that I learned. But some things just stayed
[Guest]: with me. And an example, you know, which is about how I had a boss called Suman Sinha,
[Guest]: who was my boss at Hindustan Lever for a while. And then I went and worked at Pepsi with him,
[Guest]: who's been a huge influence on my life and has been a mentor in more ways than one. I
[Guest]: remember how one of the things that he taught us was that, you know, he showed us an org
[Guest]: chart for the organization at PepsiCo. And he said he put up a chart. And these are those
[Guest]: days of those carousel slides, those 35 slides, which you had to carefully put in upside down
[Guest]: for it to be projected right in the projector. And I remember how he put up a slide which
[Guest]: showed the org chart upside down. And I thought, you know, some trainee is going to lose her
[Guest]: job for having done this wrong. And Suman actually went on to explain that it's not
[Guest]: wrong. This is the organization I'm trying to build. It's an upside down organization
[Guest]: where the person at the top of this business is our frontline salesperson. He's closest
[Guest]: to our customer. He will decide what this business will do. He will tell us what's the
[Guest]: right thing. And below him is a manager whose job is to support him. And below him is a
[Guest]: vice president whose job is to make sure that the entire function is doing what the salesman
[Guest]: needs to succeed. And he would say, you know, at the bottom of this pyramid is me. I'm just
[Guest]: here to make sure this entire organization is focused on our front, on our customers.
[Guest]: And I think that just stayed with me. And I thought, wow, what a powerful idea this
[Guest]: is because you suddenly start realizing that you don't have power over other people. You
[Guest]: don't have people reporting to you. But you start seeing them as saying, man, I'm responsible
[Guest]: for them. I'm responsible for their success. I need to do whatever it takes to help them
[Guest]: succeed because if they succeed, I'm OK. I'll be taken care of. You know, that's been a
[Guest]: pretty powerful little influence in my life to say every time I've had to lead a team
[Guest]: and I must confess, I've been sometimes blown away by the by the smart people I've had the
[Guest]: privilege of leading. And I say, wow, what a fantastic person this is. And I'd be damned
[Guest]: if I tried to tell that planner, you know, how to get it right, because, you know, he
[Guest]: was he was so good. My job then was to ensure that I could leverage that planner, get him
[Guest]: to deliver and help everybody else in the team to say, OK, now we need to take a decision.
[Guest]: So my job was to get everybody else together. And I was very happy not being the smartest
[Guest]: person in the room. And that usually meant that every time you were discussing something
[Guest]: and if it was something, let's say, to do with manufacturing or technical, I was not
[Guest]: a technical guy and there was somebody else who was smart. My job was to ensure I knew
[Guest]: how to ask the right questions, maybe ensure we were giving them support that they needed,
[Guest]: making sure that people working together. But my job was not to be the smartest techie
[Guest]: or the smartest finance person or the smartest marketing guy in the room. And that, I think,
[Guest]: has been a huge, almost a transformative piece, I think, for me to say that. Stop worrying
[Guest]: about you. Stop worrying about saying I must be the smart guy. I must be the guy getting
[Guest]: credit. People must say, wow, what a bright guy this is. I don't think that's what drove
[Guest]: me as much as saying, gosh, can I just make sure that as a team we get this right? Can
[Guest]: we ensure that our collective intelligence, can we harness that to make sure that more
[Guest]: often than not, we're doing the right thing rather than the wrong one? And there would
[Guest]: be times when we'd still call wrong. There'd be times when there would be debate and discussion
[Guest]: and I'd still have to, as a leader, take a call. But I would try very hard to ensure
[Guest]: that I had kind of got other people together. And to come back to your point, therefore,
[Guest]: that this whole idea of thinking that you have power over other people, I think that
[Guest]: hasn't been the way I might have looked at it. And that's another lesson that I learned.
[Guest]: And this was something else about an orbit line I might have read somewhere, but that
[Guest]: kind of got me thinking, which was how there's apparently a bunch of professors in Ireland
[Guest]: who did some research on Champions League footballers. And they found that footballers
[Guest]: who are two-footed earn something like 27, 28% more than footballers who are good with
[Guest]: one foot. Okay. And that set me thinking, and I figured later that there's actually
[Guest]: a school in Scotland called the Other Foot Soccer School, where they teach young children
[Guest]: to kick with both feet. Because once you're a senior footballer, then you can't be taught
[Guest]: to kick with the other foot. You've got to learn that early in your life. When it's okay
[Guest]: to kick with the wrong foot and find the ball is flying somewhere else, it doesn't matter.
[Guest]: You're okay with it. And because you're okay with failing, you gradually strengthen that
[Guest]: foot and you become good with both feet. And I think in many ways, in the corporate world,
[Guest]: it's great. It's a great idea for us to try and say, can we be two-footed? And when you're
[Guest]: two-footed, you suddenly realize you're not so good with one foot. You're not so good
[Guest]: with another function, with another discipline, but you learn to respect other people who
[Guest]: are very good at that. And I think having that humility might be a big word, but just
[Guest]: having that realization that, you know what, there are other people who will be better
[Guest]: than you in a given subject area. That's okay. Just learn to work with them. Just learn to
[Guest]: leverage them and be grateful that you've got good people helping you to get it right.
[Amit Varma]: In your book, you've actually mentioned, I think, Suman Sena in multiple places, including
[Amit Varma]: where you spoke about this upside down organizational chart, which sounds beautiful. And, you know,
[Amit Varma]: you give leadership sessions and seminars to companies and all of that, and where you
[Amit Varma]: teach all of this, which also sounds great. But the way most people look at companies
[Amit Varma]: is that, look, companies have a lot of politics. They think that, you know, to get ahead in
[Amit Varma]: the corporate world, it's not about how good you are at your job, but it's about how good
[Amit Varma]: you are at managing your seniors and all of that. Even in your book, you know, there are
[Amit Varma]: bits about the importance of dressing well, and, you know, how the exterior matters, wearing
[Amit Varma]: a tie matters, all of those things kind of matter. Equally, along with the politics,
[Amit Varma]: there is also that thing that I often say about, you know, politics in the real world,
[Amit Varma]: in the case of the state, that power always corrupts. Now, the thing is that, obviously,
[Amit Varma]: there are more checks and balances within a private company and the incentives are better.
[Amit Varma]: But there is power that, you know, till the checks and balances kick in, you know, till
[Amit Varma]: accountability kicks in, even if it's much more than, say, in public life, you know,
[Amit Varma]: it can kind of corrupt. So many people therefore have a very sceptical view of what corporate
[Amit Varma]: cultures are like in many places, like, you know, when MeToo broke a couple of years back,
[Amit Varma]: there was much talk and quite correctly, I think, of how toxic many advertising workplaces
[Amit Varma]: are, for example, for women and all those corrosive cultures kind of going through.
[Amit Varma]: So on the one hand, I see that you've not only mentioned Mr. Sinha, you've shared your
[Amit Varma]: own insights, you've spoken about other leaders through your journey from whom you've learned
[Amit Varma]: a lot. So there's a lot of talk of all these wonderful principles. But somebody from the
[Amit Varma]: outside could argue that, yeah, they sound great. But the reality of corporate India
[Amit Varma]: is kind of something different. And therefore, the assumption is that people like you who
[Amit Varma]: are trying to improve the culture, like at one point, I think, you quote Drucker saying
[Amit Varma]: that, you know, culture eats strategy for breakfast. Now, people like you, who are trying
[Amit Varma]: to improve the culture in these places, improve the way people work, you know, build in all
[Amit Varma]: these qualities, like humility and upside down org charts and all that, aren't you pushing
[Amit Varma]: against the tide in a way? And aren't you also pushing against human nature and the
[Amit Varma]: natural incentives at play. So in the course of your career, you know, if one is to read
[Amit Varma]: your book, one would just sing that, oh, Mr. Iyer's career has been so remarkable. He has
[Amit Varma]: been learning these great lessons all the time, and building these enlightened workplaces.
[Amit Varma]: But there's a bit of selection bias in there, because that's just what you're choosing to
[Amit Varma]: write about. Is there the other side also, what is your experience with it? Are there
[Amit Varma]: times you were disheartened about it, say, maybe corporate politics or whatever? Are
[Amit Varma]: there times where as a leader, you had to figure out ways to change the culture? What
[Guest]: were those struggles like? So yeah, several strands in that in the set of questions, Amit.
[Guest]: So maybe let me start by saying a couple of things which have perhaps influenced the way
[Guest]: I look at the world. I'm hugely positive. I'm a huge optimist. And for me, the default
[Guest]: always is it's a good place, it's a good world before it starts to get proved otherwise.
[Guest]: So that's certainly a huge one for me. And I often encourage other people to try and
[Guest]: think that way. And you're right. Sometimes it can be, you know, personal experiences
[Guest]: can be to the contrary, you can start thinking it's a bad place. And are there organizations
[Guest]: and office setups which are political, politicized? Of course there are. And like you referenced,
[Guest]: were there toxic work cultures? Of course there were. But does that allow us to say
[Guest]: that therefore the whole world is like that? The answer is no. And here's what I think.
[Guest]: A, you've got to believe that that's not necessarily true. And the second thing you've got to believe
[Guest]: is you can make a difference. And I often say this to young leaders about our culture.
[Guest]: So it's easy to say, my organization culture is like this, right? Or we are such a, it's
[Guest]: a terrible place or it's so bad and all of that. And my answer to that would be, if you
[Guest]: have two people working for you, for them, their organization culture is what you do.
[Guest]: It's not what HR does. It's not what the global CEO is saying. It's not what's happening in
[Guest]: some other parts of your organization. For them, our culture is what you as a leader
[Guest]: do. So my point would be, if you are the leader and you've got two people working for you,
[Guest]: set the culture right for those two people, right? And here's where it starts mattering
[Guest]: that don't blame it now on the environment. Don't say the organization is like that. It's
[Guest]: a cop out, right? You need to take ownership for it and say, you can make a difference.
[Guest]: So A, be positive about it. I think start with an assumption that things are good things.
[Guest]: And that's just the way I am. But I'd like to say that's the way we could all benefit
[Guest]: by being. The incentives are better if you do that. The second one, of course, is to
[Guest]: take ownership for what's happening and say, look, I can make a difference here. Now, what
[Guest]: are some of the challenges that we can have an organization start to get, you know, become
[Guest]: bad? I think young people coming into work today don't want to take anything which, you
[Guest]: know, they have options. They will not take rubbish from a boss. The world is changing.
[Guest]: They will speak out. There is no fear. There are options available. They will, you know,
[Guest]: if they don't like a job, the distance between an argument with the boss and a resignation
[Guest]: letter is really getting shorter by the day. This is a great place to be because these
[Guest]: young people want to change the world. And if something is happening that's not right,
[Guest]: they're saying, come on, I want to take the power. I want to change the world. And if
[Guest]: organizations can learn to harness that power and say, let's get this right, let's try and
[Guest]: get people to kind of change it. And I'll give you a couple of examples of what might
[Guest]: have happened. In one of the businesses where I worked, we had a practice where you had
[Guest]: to swipe your card to come in. OK, and that marked your attendance, it marked your time.
[Guest]: And of course, you know, good old HR would have policies like four times in a month you're
[Guest]: allowed to come 10 minutes late. But other than that, you will take half day off and
[Guest]: another repeat will mean a full day off. Now, this isn't quite anybody's idea of a great
[Guest]: organization, but most factories were built this way. And very often what happens is that
[Guest]: you start looking for contrary evidence then and you suddenly realize that if you were
[Guest]: to relax it like I thought I would, and you suddenly start wondering, are there a lot
[Guest]: other people who are willing to take advantage of it? Are you suddenly discovering that on
[Guest]: every time that you have a meeting at 10 o'clock, there are four people who have had work in
[Guest]: a school or a bank and are not there in the meeting that day? You know, so why does this
[Guest]: happen? But you've got to kind of now understand that this was culture from the past. It may
[Guest]: not work. And how do I now start thinking of it from that young millennial's perspective
[Guest]: and say, what's the culture that will work for them? How do I get this person to feel
[Guest]: the need to be in office at time, to feel the need to ensure that discipline of some
[Guest]: kind matters. So I think you have a chance to change culture. If you're willing to also
[Guest]: adapt yourself, you can't be saying culture is what I've decided. You try and figure how
[Guest]: it, how does this work for younger people? You try and take them in to that journey.
[Guest]: And you try and say, look, what can I do to make it work? One of the bigger mistakes you
[Guest]: can make as a leader is to also think that this culture is terrible. My previous organization
[Guest]: got it right. And you then try and come into a business and try and say, let me try and
[Guest]: change everything over here. And that's something else that I refer to perhaps in one of those
[Guest]: stories that I talk about, you know, setting out to drive early morning with your headlights,
[Guest]: you know, you get out in the morning at 6.30, as I did one morning. And I didn't think that
[Guest]: headlights were needed. And I go out on the street and I see lots of cars with their headlights
[Guest]: on. And I start to think, why does this man have his headlights on? And then I see another
[Guest]: car with headlights on. And then my wife says, you know, maybe they left home much earlier.
[Guest]: So for them, they had left home at a time and they needed the lights and they've still
[Guest]: got it on because they still think the light is not good enough. Whereas you came in later
[Guest]: and you didn't think there was a need for it. And I think this is so true for organizations.
[Guest]: Leader comes from outside and he starts wondering, why are people doing things this way? You
[Guest]: know, why is this man driving with his lights on? We forget that there's a good reason why
[Guest]: they're doing it. That's the way it is. That's the way they've been. And if you want to drive
[Guest]: change, the idea is not to try and say, you know what, just switch off all your lights,
[Guest]: but to try and understand why do we do things the way we do. And I also feel eventually
[Guest]: that organizations have been built in such a way that if there is a problem, it gets
[Guest]: thrown out of the system. And that's what a good organization will do. It does not allow
[Guest]: this foreign body or this virus to stay for too long. There will be a bunch of antibodies
[Guest]: that will come in and fight that virus and throw it out. Maybe that's how good organizations
[Guest]: are built. Maybe that's what we all need to try and do to try and get it right.
[Guest]: One last point, Amit, which is a big one, I think is around this whole idea of power
[Guest]: corrupting. And I think that's a real risk. And that's something that I think we all need
[Guest]: to guard against. And we need to find systems and processes within an organization where
[Guest]: this gets called out. There are some checks and balances in place to ensure that behavior,
[Guest]: which is not right, is called out. And I think the mistake organizations make is to condone
[Guest]: this behavior early on and say, it's all right, because, you know, he's such a powerful sales
[Guest]: guy. He gets, you know, he's beating his targets every month. Oh, my goodness. He has such
[Guest]: fabulous relationships with those key accounts. If he goes away, those accounts will go away
[Guest]: with him. And we then start to condone behavior, which is clearly not right. And then we expect
[Guest]: that when this person becomes senior, then the person will change. And the person just
[Guest]: thinks that, hey, if I could get away with it as a junior person, sure, this is the way
[Guest]: of the world. I will get away with it. The other challenge you have in organizations
[Guest]: is people tend to follow the leader. And therefore, you will find in an organization, if the leader
[Guest]: is this abusive, short-tempered, foul-mouthed person, young managers start modeling themselves
[Guest]: on that. They think that's the way to succeed in this organization. And you will find them
[Guest]: being disrespectful of other people, vendors, partners, consultants. And you suddenly realize
[Guest]: that there's a problem over here. And very often the problem, the rot starts at the top
[Guest]: and it's the culture that flows from there. And that's something else that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: maybe organizations need to try and set right. In your book, you've given lots of examples
[Amit Varma]: of leaders who've led from the front very well. Like there is this HLL person you describe
[Amit Varma]: who visits a small village and they're looking at products in a store and there is a tin
[Amit Varma]: of dalda that has dust all over it. And he takes out his own white handkerchief and he
[Amit Varma]: cleans that little bit of dust. And you've given a bunch of examples like that. But just
[Amit Varma]: now when you were speaking so eloquently about the dangers of power corrupting, about, you
[Amit Varma]: know, leaders getting away with stuff when they were juniors, and therefore those bad
[Amit Varma]: practices carrying on with them, and then everybody looking at them as an example, you
[Amit Varma]: said it with such conviction that it seemed that those are things you've come across in
[Amit Varma]: your own career. So without naming names or companies or whatever, have you been in situations
[Amit Varma]: where you have seen that happening, where you faced a kind of dilemma that do I just
[Amit Varma]: get on with my own career or do I try to do something about this? And which is more widespread
[Amit Varma]: these kind of bad toxic leaders who are engaged in this constant, seemingly ubiquitous political
[Amit Varma]: struggle to get ahead within a company or the kind of inspirational leader you speak
[Amit Varma]: about who sets a culture by example from the top?
[Guest]: Again, it might just be the optimist in me speaking, but I think that this toxic bad
[Guest]: leader is really a relic of the past, is probably not quite the norm anymore. I think there
[Guest]: are two or three things happening. One, there are no hiding places. Earlier, perhaps you
[Guest]: could get away with some of this stuff. And, you know, today, if you put your hand in the
[Guest]: till, you're going to be caught before you do it. And I've seen this. I've seen this
[Guest]: in the sense that, you know, I've come across situations where perhaps there have been accusations
[Guest]: of people being in it and they've been found to be true, that there were people who are
[Guest]: making a mistake. But I think that the strength of the organization has got to be in the fact
[Guest]: that if it comes to light, action is taken. The bigger problem is not that somebody's
[Guest]: got his hand in the till, but that it is allowed to continue. That I think is the bigger problem.
[Guest]: So something I've learned and struggled with, I'll give you an example. There was a situation
[Guest]: in a business where somebody had fudged an expense statement. And it was like some, I
[Guest]: think, 80 rupees spent on taxi fare to go from place A to place B, where the controller
[Guest]: in the business said that, actually, I gave that person a lift in my car. So they couldn't
[Guest]: have spent 80 bucks on a cab. And this became a bit of an issue. And here's this person
[Guest]: who was doing very well for us, you know, good colleague, nice person. And I didn't
[Guest]: think this called for the person to be sacked. But my boss insisted that we sack the person.
[Guest]: And we actually ended up sacking the person. So I protested a little bit. And then of course,
[Guest]: my boss was horrified that I might even protest it. But I think I learned a lesson there,
[Guest]: that if you let this pass, you're setting the wrong example. And now it's no longer
[Guest]: about was it 80 rupees or was it 8 crore? If it's wrong, it's wrong. And sometimes you
[Guest]: need to take these hard decisions just to get the message across that that's the organization,
[Guest]: that's the culture. Now, I think that's, again, a good one. And I've seen, I've been in organizations
[Guest]: where fairly senior people have been asked to have been let go of almost overnight because
[Guest]: they did something which violated the code of conduct. Now, it doesn't necessarily mean
[Guest]: that that person was all bad. And it's not as if the person was a complete rogue or a
[Guest]: villain. It's just that in a moment of weakness, maybe the person has done the wrong thing.
[Guest]: But I think organizations, they need to set an example to say, if it's the wrong thing,
[Guest]: it has no place over here. Too bad. We need to set an example. Out you go. That I think
[Guest]: is what will help us to ensure that organizations stay on track. And this is where I'm now coming
[Guest]: to that in the good old days, maybe there was a little more of this hierarchy. A boss was all
[Guest]: powerful. I still remember joining a business where, you know, I commented on a car. I just
[Guest]: got into the business and I looked at my factory manager and I said, you have a nice car there.
[Guest]: And he said, you know, actually, the previous boss gave it to him. Now, the previous boss
[Guest]: didn't give it to him. The organization gave it to him because he earned it. He deserved it.
[Guest]: But this feeling that previous boss gave it to me, my boss gave it to me, my boss is all
[Guest]: powerful. I think that also caused a few problems for us where everything the boss did was all right.
[Guest]: So if the boss made, you know, did a few of the things which are not all correct, let it go,
[Guest]: let it pass. That has changed, I think, today, increasingly in organizations. And I use Suman
[Guest]: Sinha as a great example because when I used to work with him in Hindustan, he was sir,
[Guest]: he was Mr. Sinha. And then you move to Pepsi a few years later and he's Suman. And even the
[Guest]: truck driver calls him Suman, you know, so that's just a culture change. But I think it's so important
[Guest]: for you to have a situation where the boss is not sir, God, he's not God, he's just another person.
[Guest]: And we need to be able to tell him if there's a problem. And I don't know if you saw that little
[Guest]: news item, I think a couple of days back, where Air India Express have said that the pilot will
[Guest]: not be called sir in the cockpit. And the whole idea here is that they found that from one of
[Guest]: those accidents that they might have, one of the several accidents that Air India Express might
[Guest]: have had, that the problem was that the co-pilot is deferring to the captain and is so respectful
[Guest]: that when the captain is making a mistake, the co-pilot is not calling it out. Because,
[Guest]: sir, if you don't mind, sir, would you mind considering that you are actually losing
[Guest]: altitude is not the best way to say it, saying, Bhaga, we are in trouble, do something, right?
[Guest]: And I think having a culture which allows us to create more equals, to break the hierarchy,
[Guest]: to call out bad behavior. And I think increasingly across organizations,
[Guest]: things like having a hotline or having an ombudsman or having systems in place,
[Guest]: where if you have a problem, you can call it out, which didn't exist earlier.
[Guest]: So my submission would be, I don't think that the corporate world is full of toxic, bad apples.
[Guest]: And if anything, it's gotten a lot better now with a new bunch of people coming into work,
[Guest]: and indeed more systems and processes coming into play.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and that's a that's a wonderful story about your colleague with his hand in the till,
[Amit Varma]: as it were, over the taxi journey. And the moment you said that story, I said, okay,
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I would just sack him no matter who it is. And that's the call that your boss took.
[Amit Varma]: And it reminds me of this old story by, I don't know who, this is probably apocryphal,
[Amit Varma]: no matter who it is about. But I think it's probably George Bernard Shaw, therefore,
[Amit Varma]: because most apocryphal stories are about him, or Oscar Wilde, whoever, yeah,
[Amit Varma]: one of these two where this person asked a lady at a party that will you sleep with me for a million
[Amit Varma]: dollars? And she said, a million dollars, you know, taking it as a thought experiment and said,
[Amit Varma]: yes. So he said that, you know, will you sleep with me for $1? And she says, what do you think
[Amit Varma]: I am? And he says, I think we've already established that now we are just haggling
[Amit Varma]: over the price. And it therefore strikes me that this is, you know, this case of,
[Amit Varma]: you know, an 80 rupee taxi voucher is exactly the same thing. It's a principle that matters
[Amit Varma]: that today if some guy is willing to do something unethical for 80 bucks,
[Amit Varma]: tomorrow he'll do it for 80 crore bucks. So you have to sort of set your culture there.
[Guest]: Yeah, but here's where I think it matters where you manage, you know, what your early years are.
[Guest]: And I think sometimes it's a privilege to be able to work with a good boss or a good organization
[Guest]: because you learn these lessons early. And I dare say there are several organizations where you
[Guest]: might say, oh, come on, it's only 80 rupees, right? You don't sack a person for that. And come on,
[Guest]: you know, if that's the case, the whole organization will get sacked. For example,
[Guest]: that's the kind of thinking that can happen. And I think I love it when you said, for instance,
[Guest]: that for you, this was a no brainer, right? You said if it's 80 bucks or 800 doesn't matter,
[Guest]: the person goes. And I think getting that value in early in your career is really what makes a
[Guest]: difference. If you grew up in a culture, in an organization where it's all right, I think this
[Guest]: can become a problem. And I often find this, Amit, when I speak to corporates, I often,
[Guest]: if I feel that there's, you know, if one of the things they want to talk about is this whole
[Guest]: thing about integrity and culture, I will often use an example where I will talk about what do
[Guest]: you do when you see a traffic light? If the traffic light is red, what happens? And everybody
[Guest]: says we'll stop. And I say, what do you do when it's red? Everybody says we'll stop. And then I
[Guest]: say, but you know, are there situations where you've seen people not stopping? Or you yourself,
[Guest]: have you seen that it's a red light and you've gone on? And suddenly that entire room which said
[Guest]: I stop when I see a red light will now say, yeah, if I'm in a hurry, yeah, if there's no traffic,
[Guest]: if it's late in the night, if there's no cop, right? And then I ask the question,
[Guest]: if you had a chance to steal a million dollars, would you steal from your company? And the answer
[Guest]: is everybody says, no, no, no, no, I wouldn't. And then you ask them, what if it's the middle
[Guest]: of the night? What if the CFO is not looking? And suddenly people realize that, look, where
[Guest]: is this going? And I think the rule is that if you see a red light, stop. It doesn't matter whether
[Guest]: there's a cop or no cop. It doesn't matter what time of the day it is. It doesn't matter that
[Guest]: everybody else is doing it. None of that is relevant. Yeah. So I try and make this point
[Guest]: to say that, you know, whether it's eight bucks, 80 bucks or 8 million, get the principle right,
[Guest]: and you will never make a mistake. You'll never find yourself in trouble. And I've often found
[Guest]: when I say this to some organizations, right, they almost look at me as saying,
[Guest]: from which planet is this person coming? He doesn't understand the reality of our world,
[Guest]: because, you know, how can you work in this world without greasing a few palms, without
[Guest]: bribing that purchase guy in that other organization, without doing something which
[Guest]: is incorrect? So I think that's still a challenge, but change will happen. Change is slow, but it
[Guest]: needs to happen. And I'm a big believer that hey, eventually, that's what should win. So I read about
[Amit Varma]: what you just said in the traffic light chapter in your book, and I have a slight kind of quibble
[Amit Varma]: with that. But before that, a couple of clarifications. And one clarification, of course,
[Amit Varma]: is that, like that apocryphal story implies that that woman was somehow doing something wrong and
[Amit Varma]: Shaw or Wilde or whoever it was that caught her out. I don't think there is anything wrong with,
[Amit Varma]: you know, making a voluntary decision to sleep with someone for money, for example,
[Amit Varma]: that's just one of those traditional moralistic notions that we have. I think sex work is as
[Amit Varma]: legitimate a profession as a podcasting or writing. The other clarification is that when I was in my
[Amit Varma]: early 20s, I might well have, you know, made a taxi voucher like that myself. Because I think
[Amit Varma]: at that time, it was just everything was chalta hai and these are small things and what difference
[Amit Varma]: does it make? So it is convenient for me today when I don't work for anyone to sit and kind of
[Amit Varma]: make these judgments. But what do you do in the moment? Do people get second chances in life? And
[Amit Varma]: all of that? I think those are larger questions. So I don't want to be too definitive about this.
[Amit Varma]: But here's my disagreement about the traffic light and ceiling a million dollars thing
[Amit Varma]: that the argument with traffic lights and I make this argument often about say,
[Amit Varma]: speed limits at the early ceiling, which are 80 km but the convention is everybody goes above that
[Amit Varma]: and it's perfectly safe and the road is empty to go above 80 km on on that particular ceiling
[Amit Varma]: is that many of these laws, so to say, don't actually make that much rational sense,
[Amit Varma]: you know, there is an emergent order, which is a conventional way in which people do things,
[Amit Varma]: which doesn't harm anyone else, which has evolved, like a particular speed at which
[Amit Varma]: people go through a road, and there is a sort of an imposed order. Now, where in my mind,
[Amit Varma]: breaking a traffic light at midnight when there is nobody there is different from stealing a
[Amit Varma]: million dollars is this, that when you break a traffic light at midnight, when there is absolutely
[Amit Varma]: nobody there, you're not harming anybody else, you're not infringing on someone's rights, right,
[Amit Varma]: that convention exists, traffic lights exist for a reason, and people follow it during the day.
[Amit Varma]: But at this moment in time, it doesn't harm anyone, where you're not doing something morally
[Amit Varma]: wrong by breaking a traffic light when the entire road is empty. However, you are obviously doing
[Amit Varma]: something morally wrong by taking a million dollars, even if you'll get away with it,
[Amit Varma]: like you correctly pointed out in your chapter values are basically what you do when no one's
[Amit Varma]: looking, which is a striking way of thinking about it. And this is again, on the one hand,
[Amit Varma]: on the other hand, kind of thing, because at one level, I'm saying that no, this comparison
[Amit Varma]: doesn't make sense, because traffic light, I can understand. In fact, I was in New York a few years
[Amit Varma]: ago, and I was staying at New Jersey with my good friend Yazad Jal, who's been on the show,
[Amit Varma]: and I was driving his car at night, because I was like, let me see how it feels to drive in America.
[Amit Varma]: And I broke a traffic light because there was no one on the road. And Yazad just, you know,
[Amit Varma]: completely panicked and of course, got billed for it and all of that. So I didn't know the convention
[Amit Varma]: in that place. And the Bombay guy in me is just saying, you know, there's no one on the road.
[Amit Varma]: But the other way of looking at it is that at a normative level, if you just follow all rules,
[Amit Varma]: if you just follow all conventions, it's a good thing to do at a normative level,
[Amit Varma]: don't seek out exceptions and all of that, just at a normative level. If you remain on the straight
[Amit Varma]: and narrow, then you can never make a mistake. So I just thought I'll share this kind of
[Amit Varma]: contradictory notion and this argument about your traffic light metaphor.
[Guest]: A fair point. And this is not to suggest for a moment that I've never jumped a red light.
[Guest]: Okay. And but I would very confidently say that I wouldn't want to do the other part of what I
[Guest]: might be talking about. But I've certainly the point I want to make here is about decide which
[Guest]: are those red lights in your life that you want to really hold on to what's really important.
[Guest]: And the point here is that no one suddenly steals $10 million from a business. No one suddenly goes
[Guest]: to, you know, takes Nissan into where it went. And we've seen heroes in our lives who after a
[Guest]: board meeting have gone and shared data or sensitive data and then found themselves in
[Guest]: jail after having done some fantastic work all through their lives. And why does this happen?
[Guest]: And my point over here is that it doesn't happen overnight. It happens because long back,
[Guest]: long back, there was this red light that you didn't stop at. And what was the equivalent of
[Guest]: that? And whether it's that if Volkswagen and what allowed a small factory engineer to tamper
[Guest]: data, right? Because it was all right. It's a monthly report. How does it matter? It doesn't
[Guest]: and to your point, it doesn't violate anybody else's rights. It didn't cause any harm to anyone
[Guest]: else. But damn, it cost that company $50 billion or more because, you know, they tampered with
[Guest]: pollution data, which was wrong, and they got caught out doing it. And my point here is, figure
[Guest]: out what are those red lights in your life? What are those rules that you want to live by? What are
[Guest]: those principles that you hold dear? And once you have that, try and ensure that you don't say it's
[Guest]: okay. It's only today. Because that will take you down a slippery slope, I think, you know,
[Amit Varma]: and that's really the point I want to make. Absolutely. Very wise words. I agree with that.
[Amit Varma]: Another question about something that you haven't really addressed in your writings or your YouTube
[Amit Varma]: talks or whatever that I haven't at least come across. But since we were talking about corporate
[Amit Varma]: culture, and since I happen to mention me too, also, and one of the things that strikes me is
[Amit Varma]: how so much corporate culture is sexist in very subtle ways, for example, air conditioning,
[Amit Varma]: right? You know, the norms for what the air conditioning temperature was was set in the 50s,
[Amit Varma]: where most people who worked in offices were men. And therefore, they were set at whatever level is
[Amit Varma]: optimal for men and they're comfortable with. But the truth is that women's body temperature
[Amit Varma]: are sort of modulated differently, and they feel colder, which is why it is incredibly common that
[Amit Varma]: at a temperature where a man is comfortable, the woman will be feeling cold and putting a sweater
[Amit Varma]: or a shawl around herself. And to me, this is also a great metaphor for everything in our society,
[Amit Varma]: just the way that it's designed with men in mind and for the comfort of men. And I'm using it now
[Amit Varma]: in a metaphorical sense as well, that, you know, a lot of women would say corporate culture might
[Amit Varma]: be more open, you can take your boss's name by their first name and all of those things.
[Amit Varma]: But this stuff remains, it's invisible, like one common complaint that women make, and I have seen
[Amit Varma]: it for myself happening in this way, is that in a meeting where there are men and there are women,
[Amit Varma]: and a woman will say something. And everybody will just listen, not react. And then a man will
[Amit Varma]: say the same thing in different words. And everybody will be like, what an idea Amit,
[Amit Varma]: kya bola hai, isko podcast dete hai, and so on. And a lot of this stuff, these invisible ways in
[Amit Varma]: which cultures, not just corporate cultures, but around us are biased against women. These were
[Amit Varma]: unseen to me. And over the last few years, maybe some of these layers have started peeling away,
[Amit Varma]: and one starts trying to actually see what all of these are. Is this stuff that you notice during
[Amit Varma]: your corporate time? Or, you know, in your corporate life rather? And is this stuff that
[Amit Varma]: you wanted to do something about? Do you think that there are being things done about this?
[Amit Varma]: What are the sort of barriers to this? What are your impressions?
[Guest]: I think this is an area where things are changing very quickly, and not quickly enough. Over the
[Guest]: last several years, the corporate world that I got into was still very, very different. And
[Guest]: I think the problem with biases, like the sexist biases that we've had, is that we didn't realize
[Guest]: it. We don't even realize that it happened. And I must tell you that around the time when
[Guest]: I was a young sales manager in Hindustani, we hired women into sales management. There
[Guest]: weren't too many women. There were like maybe a handful, two or three or four women who might have
[Guest]: been management trainees in sales. So the thing was, if you hired a management trainee who was
[Guest]: a woman into Hindustani, in those days, she would either end up in marketing, HR or finance,
[Guest]: but not in sales. And the argument and the thinking would be stuff like, you know,
[Guest]: how will you travel into those villages? How will you go and deal with the distributors?
[Guest]: And you have to go and spend time in the evening with the sales guys. What will you do? And all
[Guest]: of that. So I think there's, as you look back today, a load of rubbish. Okay. But I'm just
[Guest]: trying to say that this was so deeply ingrained in minds and workplaces tended to be far more male
[Guest]: dominated than they are today. And I think right from the time, if I look at the last 20 years or
[Guest]: so, I think the world has changed dramatically and the corporate world is trying hard. Some
[Guest]: companies more than others. And I certainly think PepsiCo, Unilever, great examples of
[Guest]: trying to drive equality in the workplace. I also remember, and I hate to say it, but I remember how
[Guest]: as men, we've often felt, oh my goodness, why are they doing this? You know, I remember very clearly
[Guest]: a situation where we thought there was a friend of ours who was in line for the CFO's job.
[Guest]: And the bad joke, and I can say it now that the bad joke was that, you know, we were trying to
[Guest]: say that if he has to get that job, he has to change his sex because there's a great attempt
[Guest]: to try and bring in a woman in that role. Now, I think this is just telling you how bad it was.
[Guest]: And the fact that there is far more awareness, and I must say this, that I think the world has
[Guest]: changed dramatically. And I know as I look at workplaces and policies, the conversation has
[Guest]: shifted. I must tell you this, that I try very hard in everything that I'm doing to make sure
[Guest]: that I'm not seeing him naturally. I try very hard to make sure that if I'm talking about a boss,
[Guest]: I'm saying, and then she said, you know, and these are small things, but I think they all matter.
[Guest]: And there are times when subconsciously I might, I might have made a statement. I'll give you an
[Guest]: example. Not so long ago, I referred to something about doing something at work when I was trying
[Guest]: to do something while the wife, and I said, while the wife was on Netflix, and I actually got a
[Guest]: friend writing into me to say, not a good thing to say. You know, why are you assuming that it's
[Guest]: only your wife who watches Netflix? Maybe a lot of men are watching Netflix through the day while
[Guest]: the women are out there working and without realizing it, like I said, but I think the
[Guest]: good news is, and I thought I saw a bit of that just now, Amit, I love the way you kind of came
[Guest]: back on that Bernard Shaw joke, because that might've been funny 30 years ago. It's not so
[Guest]: funny today, right? The world is changing. And I think we all need to acknowledge that. And,
[Guest]: and I think there are lots of women out there in the workforce today who are driving that change.
[Guest]: There are progressive organizations. You know, I think just having loo's reflecting the number
[Guest]: of men and women there are, you know, very often you'll find organizations where there's like this
[Guest]: one tiny room, which becomes a women's loo. And there's this massive place, which is the men's
[Guest]: loo. Why? Because in the good old days, there were so many more men at work that needs to change.
[Guest]: I think just the air conditioning, not a great example. I think just being respectful of what
[Guest]: women might need, just being respectful of their needs like anybody else's. And also I think being
[Guest]: sensitive to the differences and creating that sensitivity and calling it out and saying,
[Guest]: it is not acceptable. I still see situations where there is a leader who will crack this
[Guest]: not so okay joke, right? Especially in mixed company, it's not acceptable.
[Guest]: And yet there'll be this nervous laughter around the room. And those people say,
[Guest]: the boss has said it must laugh. And there'll be a woman sitting over there
[Guest]: wondering what's going on here. And I think that will change. And that woman is changing
[Guest]: the world and she's making sure that that boss doesn't get away with it. And I think this is a
[Guest]: big change happening. And like I said, I think there's a lot that's happening. Is it enough?
[Guest]: Maybe not. Certainly a lot more needs to be done, but I think it's such a deep rooted malaise.
[Guest]: And I'd like to believe that particularly for some of us who've grown up in cities,
[Guest]: who have been privileged to have women around us, spouses, daughters, friends, girlfriends,
[Guest]: we've learned to respect them. And this is still different and challenging perhaps for a bunch of
[Guest]: men coming into work from another part of our country, another part of society where it's still,
[Guest]: you know, where women are not being respected. If you grew up in a home where your dad did not
[Guest]: respect your mom, you will struggle with this, I think, in the early years of your life.
[Guest]: And I think we just need to kind of enable that change and recognize that in this continuum,
[Guest]: we are all perhaps at different points. The destination is clear, but we are at different
[Guest]: points in that journey. And we just need to try and say, how can we take people along and make
[Guest]: sure that we're making it easier for the other half of the world? So, you know, taking off from
[Amit Varma]: your point about this being a deep rooted malaise, which I sort of agree with, there's another very
[Amit Varma]: nuanced point that your book makes, which I find relevant to this. Because while we were talking
[Amit Varma]: about this, it also struck me that this sexism doesn't come from malice, it comes from blindness,
[Amit Varma]: that people simply aren't aware. There are jokes I would have cracked 20 years ago, which I would
[Amit Varma]: not crack today, or that might reflexively come into my head now, but I have that filter, which
[Amit Varma]: stops me from actually saying it. And in your book, you speak, of course, about Hanlon's razor,
[Amit Varma]: which I keep talking about all the time in the context of politics, which is never attribute to
[Amit Varma]: malice, what can be adequately explained by stupidity. And or in this case, the guy just
[Amit Varma]: doesn't know the guy has just never experienced this way of thinking, he doesn't realize that
[Amit Varma]: it's kind of wrong. Like a friend of mine runs this mailing list where one of the guiding principles
[Amit Varma]: there is assume goodwill. And the idea being someone says something that you don't agree with,
[Amit Varma]: don't assume they're coming from a bad place that they're malicious, you know, one, they may be
[Amit Varma]: ignorant about something two, they may be right and you may be wrong. And just assume at least
[Amit Varma]: that the intention is good. And then you can explore that further. But leaving that aside,
[Amit Varma]: you know, your optimism is quite lovely. I haven't been in the corporate world for like a decade and
[Amit Varma]: a half. So your optimism is sort of lovely to hear. Tell me now about I mean, we'll come back
[Amit Varma]: to the principles in your book and the life lessons and all that a little later after the break,
[Amit Varma]: but I want to go on with your personal journey for a moment. Take me through your corporate
[Amit Varma]: journey. What was it like? Number one was a job something that you loved doing people think of
[Amit Varma]: corporate jobs as Oh, it is drudgery and I have to do this and have to earn a living and I'm shifting
[Amit Varma]: city so many times. In your case, was it something that you love doing? And a supplementary question
[Amit Varma]: to that would be that were you all the time getting meta about your job and formulating
[Amit Varma]: all your learnings from there because what you've done after the corporate part of your career ended
[Amit Varma]: is, you know, brought out all these learnings, you know, from your career, and I would say improved
[Amit Varma]: at least 1000s of lives by sharing them with the world and by teaching people. But what's that
[Amit Varma]: process of actually formulating those lessons, those guidelines, those principles for yourself?
[Amit Varma]: Was it a process that was on while you were in your corporate journey?
[Guest]: It's hard to, it's hard to be able to put a finger and say, yeah, that's that it was always the case.
[Guest]: And I completely buy into your point about how some of these things work so well, when you look
[Guest]: back and you can connect the dots and say, that's how it worked for you. But what was true, Amit,
[Guest]: is, is perhaps two things. First, I actually feel that what is it about that little boy from Jaipur?
[Guest]: How did he manage to kind of, you know, get into these funny roles and do reasonably,
[Guest]: reasonably important enough work or in in seemingly important roles? How did this happen?
[Guest]: And I think the answer to that could possibly be that, you know, I kept learning a little bit
[Guest]: from other people, kept getting looking at other people and saying, wow, how does this work here?
[Guest]: What can I learn from this person? And I think that that has been a common thread, perhaps in
[Guest]: my life where I have been maybe a bit of that optimist slash positive guy also where I might
[Guest]: see someone who might be having lots of other problems here, but I'll still try and figure
[Guest]: despite those problems, he's doing something, something is right here. So let's try and figure
[Guest]: what's right. What can we learn from this person? And so maybe I kept looking at it in that sense.
[Guest]: The second thing that happened was that very early in my life, I perhaps figured that
[Guest]: without realizing it and without giving it a term or a label, I figured that stories are powerful.
[Guest]: And that being able to use stories or tell stories can help you to get your message across.
[Guest]: So as a young area sales manager running a monthly meeting with eight salespeople in a small hotel
[Guest]: somewhere, well, you know, you can keep telling them,
[Guest]: you know, have to get our target. It's looking impossible, but, you know, we will get there.
[Guest]: You can keep saying it, nothing happens. But maybe if you can tell them a little story,
[Guest]: suddenly the mood in the room seems to lift. And then later that night when everyone's having a
[Guest]: beer, suddenly that story gets referenced again. And you realize that, you know, you had spent so
[Guest]: much time trying to tell them, no one seemed to get it. And now you've told them a story and that
[Guest]: has stuck with people. So I think this tendency or this habit of then using stories started to
[Guest]: become something that I would do. And maybe that in some ways is, if I was to look at my career
[Guest]: and say, how do I remember some of those little things, maybe that's, that might have helped
[Guest]: to make that happen. It also kind of moved into another part of my life. Very often I would read
[Guest]: an entire book and after finishing, you know, 340 pages, I would remember this one little story
[Guest]: tucked away somewhere, which is a story that I said, wow, that was very cool. So there is a lot
[Guest]: of good stuff in those 350 pages, but that little story would stick out for me. My kids would often
[Guest]: say this, that they know what I'm reading by the story I'm telling them at dinner time, you know,
[Guest]: and I would probably, I can't wait. I have to tell you that, you know what, I read this really
[Guest]: cool thing and it still happens. I would have come across something interesting and I'll want to
[Guest]: share it in as much as I talked about Air India Express and, you know, saying that don't call sir.
[Guest]: I just saw it and I said, hey, this is such a cool story. And maybe that's really what has kind
[Guest]: of stayed with me through this entire process to say that there are lessons that we can learn.
[Guest]: And I, how do I put it? I think I was lucky. I was lucky that I got to work in some reasonably
[Guest]: good business. I'm guessing if I had worked in a business where values weren't so important,
[Guest]: where the culture was politicized, where they were favorites and people were doing all kinds
[Guest]: of funny things, maybe I would have been a different person. I may not have been the person
[Guest]: I am. I might have struggled with it perhaps, but I may not have learned so much. And because I
[Guest]: learned some of these things, I've often felt, hey, sometimes you see lots of bright people
[Guest]: getting it wrong, you know, and I think, wow, I wish they also would get to, you know,
[Guest]: learn some of this stuff. And maybe that's really what gets me going to say, perhaps there's a
[Guest]: lesson that I might have learned, which can help someone else. You know, it may be a tiny lesson.
[Amit Varma]: I'm totally with you on the value of stories. Like I keep telling my,
[Amit Varma]: sort of the participants of my writing course as well, that, you know, go for the concrete,
[Amit Varma]: the abstract to take care, but go for the concrete. And that really makes an impact.
[Amit Varma]: At which point I am going to ask you to go for the concrete. Like at one point,
[Amit Varma]: you mentioned the hypothetical example, the sales meeting chal raha hai,
[Amit Varma]: and I tell them a story and it comes back to me. Do you remember any such interesting story,
[Amit Varma]: which you, you know, told back in the day where you were actually a sales manager that, you know,
[Guest]: that worked? Yeah. So I'll tell you a story that we used many years ago. So I used to be in PepsiCo.
[Guest]: Okay. And soft drinks was a very seasonal business. So if you were in UP, for example,
[Guest]: dukaane band ho jati hain, it's cold and they really start opening in after Holi. So March,
[Guest]: April is when the season will start. So Jan, Feb, March is a washout as far as soft drink
[Guest]: sales are concerned. And as a company, I remember the boss, you know, we had decided that what can
[Guest]: we do to try and flatten seasonality, which meant, can we do something to sell more soft drinks in
[Guest]: Jan, Feb, March? Now, given that our targets and our accounting year was Jan, December,
[Guest]: it was a terrible sight to see that the first three months you were doing nothing,
[Guest]: you were losing money because, you know, your costs were all in place, not getting enough
[Guest]: revenue. So we said, what can we do to sell more soft drinks in that first quarter of the year?
[Guest]: And therefore, I think the theme was to try and say, let's be fast off the block to get Jan,
[Guest]: Feb, March off to a great start. And the way the company looked at it was to say that, you know
[Guest]: what, let's get it off to a great start, Jan, Feb, March, we have an opportunity, let's make it
[Guest]: happen. If you do that, if, you know, four can become 6%, six, eight percent, we are off to a
[Guest]: great start, the year will be great. I don't think it was working too well. And that's when I, you
[Guest]: know, I'm a bit of a cricket fan, so I came up with this whole thing about how in the good old
[Guest]: days, in 50 overs cricket, the belief was that you start slowly, keep your wickets intact, and then,
[Guest]: you know, you have the slog overs and then you start to say that that's when you start hitting,
[Guest]: right? And I talked about how Jaisurya and Kaluvitarna actually changed that for us and
[Guest]: Mark Greatbatch perhaps another level and how just changing the rules can catch your opposition
[Guest]: by surprise, you can catch them off guard. And if he were to suddenly start doing stuff in Jan,
[Guest]: Feb, March, just wake up to the opportunity that might be there. And suddenly we might discover
[Guest]: that we've set a platform from which we can now launch into an even higher plane. And therefore,
[Guest]: a little cricketing story actually got us off to saying that, you know what, Jan, Feb, March could
[Guest]: be very different in a soft drinks calendar year. And it's not as if it became the norm and
[Guest]: everything changed, etc, etc. But it helped us to land the message that, you know what,
[Guest]: there is an idea here, let's try and make Jan, Feb, March much bigger than it is. And there's
[Guest]: no rule which says it has to be that Jan, Feb, March mein kuch nahin hoga and the slog overs
[Guest]: will start only in April.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and that cricketing analogy is great. And in a sense, it also illustrates another lesson
[Amit Varma]: that you have in your book, which is that don't assume that the way things were done are still
[Amit Varma]: the right way to do them, that you have to look at new paradigms. And of course, that happened
[Amit Varma]: with ODI cricket, because if you look at run rates through the 70s, 80s, 90s, 2000s, up to the
[Amit Varma]: modern day, where England have taken it another level ahead, that they've just gone up because
[Amit Varma]: you change the way of playing. Earlier, you followed a kind of a more test matchy structure,
[Amit Varma]: and then later on the structure evolved. And I think in T20, many teams still haven't figured
[Amit Varma]: out the optimal structure, where when T20 cricket began at the end of the last decade, at the end
[Amit Varma]: of the aughties rather, you know, they transplanted the ODI format that you slog at the start,
[Amit Varma]: pinch it at the start, then you consolidate, then you slog at the end. But the truth is,
[Amit Varma]: because you have the same number of batting resources, but now spread out over 20 overs
[Amit Varma]: instead of 50, the expected value, the EV of aggression, as it were, just goes up massively.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, that old structure kind of becomes redundant. So that's still a lesson that I see
[Amit Varma]: that many teams haven't got. In fact, elsewhere in your book, you speak about how when you're
[Amit Varma]: building a team, you don't want to pick a team with the 11 best players, you want to figure out
[Amit Varma]: the best team and you give the examples of, you know, Kohli's Royal Challengers with Kohli and
[Amit Varma]: de Villiers and Gale and all that and the example of the early Rajasthan Royals. But I think the big
[Amit Varma]: mistake that Kohli has consistently made as a T20 captain, and which is why Bangalore have kind of
[Amit Varma]: not managed to dominate the IPL despite the riches, is a strategic mistake that they simply
[Amit Varma]: haven't figured out that you need to kind of front load the hitting and just keep going. That
[Amit Varma]: period of consolidation is perhaps overrated. Sorry, that was a digression.
[Guest]: But I hope that book is coming Amit. You have so much to talk about as far as, you know, getting
[Guest]: better metrics of performance, looking at cricket strategy very differently in T20. I've heard you
[Guest]: speak about this in some forum. And I think there's a great book waiting to be written on this one.
[Guest]: I actually think it's also a mindset thing. It just goes to show how difficult it is for for us to change
[Guest]: and to adapt from one to the other. And our default setting seems to be to say the old one will work,
[Guest]: you know, and I can stay with it. And then just minor tweaking and we think, oh, I have adapted
[Guest]: and I'm now very good for it. Whereas the reality is that you probably need to just demolish it
[Guest]: and start afresh. And, you know, the value of a wicket is such a powerful idea. And I must tell
[Guest]: you a little story myself. This is Rahul Dravid talking about him becoming a better T20 cricketer
[Guest]: in IPL. And, you know, he says Yusuf Pathan was his teammate in the Royals. And he says,
[Guest]: I used to watch Pathan play and, you know, and I was very impressed with his batting. And then
[Guest]: Yusuf apparently came to Rahul one day and told him, Rahul bhai, do you know what your problem is?
[Guest]: And he says, you know, you put too much of a price on your wicket.
[Guest]: You know, you're too scared that I'll get out. You know, you put too much of a price on your
[Guest]: wicket. And Rahul says, I spent my entire career putting a price on my wicket and being lauded for
[Guest]: it. And here was this chap telling me, you're putting too much of a price on your wicket.
[Guest]: He says, the rules of T20 are such that your wicket is not so important, right? It's more
[Guest]: important for you to be able to score that six or four. And Pathan, he says, would go in five
[Guest]: innings. In three of them, he'd throw his wicket away. He didn't care. But in the other two,
[Guest]: he would win a game for you because of the way he would bat. And he says, and Rahul says, that
[Guest]: opened my eyes that maybe I just need to think fundamentally differently about my game because
[Guest]: the format calls for it. And maybe that's something that you, you know, you also advocate, I think so.
[Amit Varma]: That's fantastic. Because, yeah, obviously, because you have 10 wickets spread out over 20
[Amit Varma]: overs instead of 50. So the natural conclusion there is that the value of a wicket goes down
[Amit Varma]: and the cost of a dot ball goes up. So you have to look at the EV of each action,
[Amit Varma]: which as a statistical person, obviously, you're familiar with expected value.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, the expected value of aggression is just far higher. And it's therefore a tragedy
[Amit Varma]: when a team places too much of a price on his wickets. And you see, they've gone through 20
[Amit Varma]: overs and they've only lost three wickets, which regardless of how much they've scored is a waste
[Amit Varma]: of resources, because they had hitters in the pavilion who could have, you know, lifted the
[Amit Varma]: rate. And therefore, they should all have been a little more aggressive. As far as my book is
[Amit Varma]: concerned, yeah, I was, Wesleyan did ask me to write a book on this, which I was supposed to
[Amit Varma]: deliver months ago, some point I have to kind of get down and finish it. Final flippant question
[Amit Varma]: before we continue with your personal journey, that, you know, I saw one of my friends,
[Amit Varma]: Peter Griffin asked on Facebook and Twitter recently that if you are in advertising,
[Amit Varma]: have you ever, you know, felt bad about working on a particular product, which
[Amit Varma]: didn't gel with whatever your personal value system was and all of that. Now, for a long time,
[Amit Varma]: you were in charge of Pepsi, which is basically selling sugar. And we know that sugar is poison.
[Amit Varma]: Did that thought ever cross your mind? I don't want to put you on the spot.
[Guest]: It's just sort of a flippant kind of. No, it's not flippant at all. I was hugely
[Guest]: passionate about Pepsi. And in all honesty, I also survived, not survived as much as saying
[Guest]: I was there when there was this huge crisis of seeing this pesticide in Pepsi, you know,
[Guest]: and we spent a year struggling with it. And I think we took great pride in our products
[Guest]: and in Pepsi. And honestly, at that time, I didn't think of it as being anything wrong.
[Guest]: I guess the awareness around sugar and what it might do for you and the need to kind of
[Guest]: cut it down, I think is far more now than it might have been at that time.
[Guest]: The awareness now that you shouldn't be selling it to kids versus, you know, we used to target
[Guest]: kids and our kids were hugely passionate about Pepsi. So I must confess that while I was there
[Guest]: and while I was doing what I was doing, I didn't think of it as would I have gone and worked for
[Guest]: a liquor company? Chances are no. Would I have gone and worked for a cigarette company? Chances
[Guest]: are no. In my mind, did I see Pepsi that way? Honest answer, I didn't. And therefore, that
[Guest]: begs the question, perhaps, that what would I do today? And would I, you know, would I look
[Guest]: at it differently? I still think that Pepsi still shown that they are responsible. They try to get
[Guest]: it right. And, you know, they will not advertise to children. They are trying to ensure that their
[Guest]: sugar level, you know, comes down. But to answer your question, you know, I never thought of it
[Guest]: that way. And for me, Pepsi was like, if there were the best years of my life, I had a blast
[Guest]: while I was at Pepsi. I really enjoyed working with some fabulous people. I also discovered how
[Guest]: being passionate about a business can make a huge difference to outcomes.
[Guest]: And I also learned how sometimes having an enemy can actually foster that passion. We used to joke
[Guest]: that apparently there was a saying in Coke that if there was no Pepsi, they would have had to
[Guest]: invent it because their strategy and everything that happened in the world happened because there
[Guest]: was this other, you know, the shark in the tank or an enemy at the door kind of thing. And that
[Guest]: made a huge difference to the way we might be. We woke up every morning saying we've got to win.
[Guest]: And you knew that, you know, you would bleed blue because you were Pepsi. And I think this whole
[Guest]: idea of saying, how do you build, how do you get a team of people to be passionate about what they
[Guest]: do? And in the context of what we see in our country and what's happening, maybe there are
[Guest]: lessons over here, both good and bad, in terms of how, if you can get people to be excited by a
[Guest]: cause, they will often suspend judgment and just do what's required. And suddenly, the fact that
[Guest]: you are weak, that you're not spending as much in terms of advertising dollars as your competitor,
[Guest]: the fact that your, you know, your brand salience scores are not as high as the other person,
[Guest]: all that becomes irrelevant because you started believing in a cause, which is to say, you know,
[Guest]: what, we're going to kill the other guy and we'll become number one, you know, or a more
[Guest]: milder version of a politically correct version of that. So, you know, can work against you,
[Guest]: but can work for you. I think that's the way I'd put it.
[Amit Varma]: No, it strikes me that, you know, passion is a double-edged sword in more than one way. Like
[Amit Varma]: one of the pieces of advice that I think I give people, which kind of came from early personal
[Amit Varma]: experience in the corporate world, is that don't get too passionate about your job. My sense was
[Amit Varma]: that there are people who get too passionate about their jobs, their sense of self becomes
[Amit Varma]: too deep. And then when something happens, when they have to leave or something goes wrong,
[Amit Varma]: then their entire lives are shattered. And my advice to them always was that save your passion
[Amit Varma]: for what you do in your free time, whether it's your hobbies or whether it's something else that
[Amit Varma]: you do. And when you're working, work with full intensity, give it everything, you know, that's
[Amit Varma]: your dharma, you're there to do a job, work with full intensity, give it all that, but don't get
[Amit Varma]: emotionally involved with it. Because if it goes bad, it is not worth going through that emotional
[Amit Varma]: turmoil for over a mere job, for example, which almost seems to contradict what you're saying.
[Amit Varma]: And I get what you're saying as well, because you will do anything to the best of your abilities
[Amit Varma]: when you're more passionate about it. And when, you know, so what are your thoughts on this?
[Guest]: The world is changing. And I'd like to believe that, you know, the kids at work today think of
[Guest]: it perhaps slightly differently than we might have. I don't think when I was in, when I was at work,
[Guest]: we had this luxury of thinking that, you know, this is work, and I will just treat it as a
[Guest]: compartment. And then I have this other passion, and this is my free time, and this is what I will
[Guest]: do. In many ways, they kind of, the lines got blurred, it all merged. If you were not happy at
[Guest]: work, chances are you were not happy. It's not like you could say, I'll shut it off, and I'll
[Guest]: just do what I want to do. And I think therefore getting, enjoying what you were doing, feeling
[Guest]: good about it, enjoying the people you are working with, I think became a huge part of it. And I
[Guest]: think you can do well, all of us will do well if we start to feel that we are enjoying what we are
[Guest]: doing. Another lesson that I think I learned, and I try and tell young people is that it's not
[Guest]: to suggest that there will not be moments that you won't enjoy. There won't be parts of a job
[Guest]: that you won't enjoy. It's par for the course. But you need to get over those. And if you start
[Guest]: saying, I don't like this little bit, so I'm out of here, chances are you'll never stay anywhere
[Guest]: because there'll always be a tiny bit which you won't enjoy. And which will then make you say,
[Guest]: I'm out of here, I'm out of here, I'm out of here. And then you'll suddenly struggle to say,
[Guest]: why am I not getting anywhere? So for me, being passionate about what you do and as a leader,
[Guest]: and I'm just saying this now, we sold Pepsi and it was easy to be passionate about Pepsi
[Guest]: because in those days, if you were on a flight, the guy next to you would be this snooty guy
[Guest]: reading something and he'd suddenly ask you, what do you do? And you'd say, Pepsi, and he'd shut
[Guest]: the book and then tell you about, what you should do, about your taste, about how my daughter likes
[Guest]: it. My son doesn't like it. Coke is better, not better. I think in your advertising, you should
[Guest]: do this. Pepsi was all over. It was such a high interest category. It was easy to be passionate
[Guest]: about. You had an enemy. But I must tell you that one of the challenges I had was I went and sold
[Guest]: Yellow Pages after that. Now, how boring can Yellow Pages be compared to colas? And you don't
[Guest]: have Shah Rukh Khan and Sachin Tendulkar telling you, use Infomedia Yellow Pages. Getting my team
[Guest]: to be excited about Yellow Pages, to be excited about saying, we are doing something special.
[Guest]: We're going to help that small business get it right. And getting people to believe in it,
[Guest]: I think was an important step for me to get people excited to do more than they might have thought
[Guest]: was possible. And therefore, for me, that's what passion might have done for them. And you're
[Guest]: right. It is not to suggest that it's the end of the world. If the job goes, if something doesn't
[Guest]: work out right, it's only a job after all. But while you're doing it, I think it's a good idea
[Amit Varma]: to be passionate about what you do. So two questions. One, aren't Yellow Pages sort of
[Amit Varma]: the Kodak of the informational world in the sense completely miss a bus and gone? And two,
[Amit Varma]: when you're passionate about something, and does it create the danger that you're closed
[Amit Varma]: to the possibility that what you're doing today may be completely irrelevant tomorrow?
[Amit Varma]: As I guess, in the case of Yellow Pages, if I'm mistaken, please tell me.
[Guest]: No, so you're absolutely right. So Yellow Pages is history. It's not there. But
[Guest]: so one of the things we did when we were when I was with the Yellow Pages business was we tied
[Guest]: up with Alibaba and we brought Alibaba into India. So that Alibaba's entry into India was at some
[Guest]: level with us at that stage. So just to make the point that we recognized that Yellow Pages are
[Guest]: not likely to last very long. We also recognize that. So we had a telephone answering system and
[Guest]: you know, ask me as a service that we would do. But we recognize even that may not be future
[Guest]: proof enough. And really the way to go would be to try and say, how can we leverage the internet
[Guest]: to get this right? So you're right. The only difference I'd say is that it wasn't a Kodak
[Guest]: moment. We tried to get Alibaba in. But then, of course, the way things work in business,
[Guest]: businesses get bought and sold and get deprioritized. And, you know, it's I also say
[Guest]: this, Amit, it's it's always tough when you are running Kodak to see the Kodak moment and say
[Guest]: that, you know, it's very easy to look back and say, what were they thinking? What are they smoking?
[Guest]: How could they do this? Right. But when you're making when you're valued as high as you are,
[Guest]: and you're making all those billions in profit, it's not easy to say, let's destroy our business.
[Guest]: You know, it's not easy. And I have a lot of respect for people who can do that. And I think
[Guest]: Gillette is a great example of that. You know, as anyone and, you know, as all of us who might
[Guest]: have used Gillette Blades, you are very happy with Gillette. And then came Mach 1. And you thought,
[Guest]: wow, very nice. And you upgraded and you paid a little more. You didn't need Mach 2. And you
[Guest]: didn't need Mach 3. And you didn't need Mach 3 plus. Right. But they keep doing this to make
[Guest]: sure that they're still giving you a blade, which is better than what somebody else might give you.
[Guest]: And even if it means killing the previous one, they will do it. And I think it takes courage
[Guest]: to do it. But as we've learned, it's not about having a choice. It's just about having the
[Guest]: wisdom and having having voices in the system, which will tell you that's what you need to do
[Amit Varma]: and listening to those voices. True. In fact, a great example of this is actually Netflix,
[Amit Varma]: which, you know, began as a DVD rental service. And then they killed that business and they did
[Amit Varma]: this and you know, in a sense played a part in the massive change that has happened since.
[Amit Varma]: Let's take a quick commercial break. And when we come out of the break, we'll move past your
[Amit Varma]: corporate career into your role as a teacher and motivator and so on and talk about your book in
[Amit Varma]: some detail as well. Long before I was a podcaster, I was a writer. In fact, chances are that many of
[Amit Varma]: you first heard of me because of my blog India Uncut, which was active between 2003 and 2009
[Amit Varma]: and became somewhat popular at the time. I love the freedom the form gave me. And I feel I was
[Amit Varma]: shaped by it in many ways. I exercise my writing muscle every day and was forced to think about
[Amit Varma]: many different things because I wrote about many different things. Well, that phase in my life
[Amit Varma]: ended for various reasons. And now it is time to revive it. Only now I'm doing it through a
[Amit Varma]: newsletter. I have started the India Uncut newsletter at indiancut.substack.com where I
[Amit Varma]: will write regularly about whatever catches my fancy. I'll write about some of the themes I cover
[Amit Varma]: in this podcast and about much else. So please do head on over to indiancut.substack.com and
[Amit Varma]: subscribe. It is free. Once you sign up, each new installment that I write will land up in your
[Amit Varma]: email inbox. You don't need to go anywhere. So subscribe now for free. The India Uncut newsletter
[Amit Varma]: at indiancut.substack.com. Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: just delightful does it really well. And he's got these tropes that repeat themselves. And one of
[Amit Varma]: them is this bit where he says where he'll warn somebody against doing something. And then at the
[Amit Varma]: end, he'll say ye mat kehna ki Ranveer ne bataya nahi. So you know, you're the title of your book
[Amit Varma]: sort of reminded me of that. Now while talking about your corporate journey, I've tried to kind
[Amit Varma]: of get you to talk about your sort of journey to the top where you became CEO and MD and led these
[Amit Varma]: great companies, but I can see that you're too modest to go there yourself. Let's talk, however,
[Amit Varma]: about both that phase when you're leading these companies and what you bring into it, and also
[Amit Varma]: your openness to then reinventing yourself in the way that you did, like how did that transition
[Amit Varma]: happen? Were these thoughts that I will do this that I will share my learnings and write books
[Amit Varma]: like this, do courses like this? Was it kind of there from before? Or was it something that
[Amit Varma]: happened after, you know, you you led these companies? And was there a moment where you think
[Amit Varma]: about what next? And also, I have no idea if you bought a BMW in your 40s. But was this some kind
[Amit Varma]: of midlife crisis? And what form did that take?
[Guest]: No. So I'll tell you a couple of couple of pointers, perhaps in this direction. The first was
[Guest]: that something I would do every year is make out a list of resolutions for the year or things that I
[Guest]: will do this year. And I can look back maybe to 20, 25 years ago, I certainly remember, I think
[Guest]: there's a 1998 version of it, there's a 2000 version of it, which will include things like have
[Guest]: a waist size 32, which never happened, or have a golf handicap of 18, which has never happened, or
[Guest]: write a book, which is also was a recurring part of my wish list or my, you know, what things I
[Guest]: want to do this year kind of stuff. And interestingly enough, when I was leaving towards
[Guest]: the end of my stint at Infomedia, which is the Yellow Pages business that I ran, it was it had
[Guest]: got sold to a strategic investor. And I was just, you know, I was staying on till I finish, I used
[Guest]: to write a blog over there. And, and the blog was had started to become reasonably popular, which
[Guest]: means that, you know, three colleagues and four friends would read it and say good things about
[Guest]: it. And suddenly, of course, I wrote something about tipping in a restaurant. And, and the
[Guest]: lesson that I learned about tipping, and guess what, there was this waiter from a small town in
[Guest]: the United States who wrote in to say what a good thought. And it suddenly struck me, wow, here I
[Guest]: am writing a blog, which I think is restricted to, you know, friends and family, and somebody else
[Guest]: is reading it and responding to it. And that said, you know, maybe there's something happening
[Guest]: here. The blog kept happening, you know, I kept writing reasonably regularly, I enjoyed it, it was
[Guest]: like a message to my own team. And then it struck me that maybe there's an idea here for a book. So
[Guest]: of course, I, I decided that I must write that book. And I, you know, and this is that year where
[Guest]: I'm about to leave a business, and then I'm not sure what I want to do, I'm thinking I'm going to
[Guest]: write and speak and do all those cool things, who wants to go back to the corporate world. So we
[Guest]: say, let's make a, and I've read somewhere that, you know, the way to do this is you must make a
[Guest]: book proposal. So I make a book proposal, which suggests why I think, you know, the best idea
[Guest]: there is, and then I send it out to three publishers, I send it to Penguin, I send it to
[Guest]: Harper. And then of course, to keep it easy, I say, let me also send it to Rupa and Jaiko.
[Guest]: That will be done, you know. And guess what, within a week of sending it, I get a immediate
[Guest]: response from Rupa saying not interested. And then a week later, I call up Jaiko, who's in the
[Guest]: same city that I live in, which I live in, which is Bombay, and I call up Jaiko and say, I'd send
[Guest]: this book. And they put me through to an editor who I can swear is in the, you know, is probably
[Guest]: in the kitchen, and I can hear the pressure cooker go off. And she says, you know, we do too
[Guest]: many of this kind of book. Tell me what is it about? And I suddenly discover there's something
[Guest]: called an elevator pitch, which I don't have. Nothing happens. And then of course, a book
[Guest]: starts to happen. And Penguin responds three months later and says that, you know what, the
[Guest]: editor lady, kind lady called Heather Adams writes to me and says, I've liked what I've read, I'd
[Guest]: love to make it a book, and we'd love to work with you. And I think this is like a dream come
[Guest]: true. So maybe that's one watershed moment of sorts where the book happens. And that starts to
[Guest]: change things for me. And maybe I'll come back to what might it what it might do for me over
[Guest]: there. Let me go back a little bit and say that something else that I that might have made a
[Guest]: difference was that I, I know this, this is popular, icky guy, kind of the book and the idea.
[Guest]: And I think the idea is pretty powerful. And, and somewhere along the way, I guess I started to
[Guest]: figure this for myself that, you know, maybe what can give me happiness is if I can work in that
[Guest]: sweet spot, where I'm doing something that I'm reasonably good at, that I'm uniquely good at
[Guest]: something that I enjoy doing something that has value in this world and will make a difference.
[Guest]: If I can kind of find the intersection of those four circles, maybe I'll be in a sweet spot. And
[Guest]: that for me starts to kind of work to say this might just be an interesting space to be. And I
[Guest]: still remember that, you know, from conferences in businesses from many years ago, I would, I
[Guest]: would be that I would speak and people would think, wow, that was, no one came and told me, I
[Guest]: think that was such a great strategic decision. This is going to change our market share, but
[Guest]: they would probably come and tell me that was, you know, that people, bottlers or
[Guest]: distributors would come and say, that was very interesting. So again, looking back, I would feel
[Guest]: that maybe there's something that I have over there as a strength. I met a man called Brian
[Guest]: Tracy, when I was running Infomedia, Brian Tracy is this, you know, is an American motivational speaker,
[Guest]: but of those, one of those guru kind of guys been around for a long time, written like a million
[Guest]: books and, and a few million tapes sold, et cetera, et cetera. And I told him, I want to be a
[Guest]: speaker. I want to quit all this corporate world and become a speaker and become a motivational
[Guest]: speaker. Like, you know, so, so he said to me, he said, you know what, don't do that. Don't be in
[Guest]: a hurry to quit and do this. You start to speak, you speak 200 times, speak at the Rotary Club,
[Guest]: speak in your school, speak in your local complex, speak wherever you get invited, just speak.
[Guest]: And if you've spoken 200 times, two things would have happened. One, see if you still enjoy it
[Guest]: after you've spoken 200 times. And two, see if 200 people call you. And it's quite likely that you
[Guest]: don't get to that 200 number. But if both these happen, then you're probably in a place where you
[Guest]: can say, yep, I still want to do it. And what happened for me was when I, when the book was
[Guest]: out, it got me a lot of opportunities to speak around the book. So lots of friends and other
[Guest]: companies, HR folks would all call me and say, come speak to colleges would call me and say, speak
[Guest]: about the book. And the book started, you know, the book was the habit of winning. And I just
[Guest]: enjoyed sharing stories about winning, which is big stories from Pepsi, from soap, from cricket,
[Guest]: whatever it was. And I started to speak. And I actually literally took that 200 speaking
[Guest]: engagement seriously. And I did that. And I started to enjoy it. And then by then, of course,
[Guest]: the second book happened, and then there started being conflict. I got invited to speak at a TEDx
[Guest]: event. And it clashed with my global CEO's visit to India, which happened, you know, and therefore
[Guest]: I couldn't do the TEDx talk, which at that time, TEDx was still happening. And it's still something
[Guest]: special in that sense. And I thought, oh, gosh, missing an opportunity. And I guess, somewhere
[Guest]: along the way, this, you know, a second book happened, speaking was giving me great joy. I'd be
[Guest]: at an airport with some guy would come up to me and say, sir, you remember, or you had come to our
[Guest]: company event, or you came and spoke, and you know, we need to repeat something I might have
[Guest]: said. I thought this is this is so cool. This is what I want to do. And literally, you know, I
[Guest]: really asked myself that question, if I was to be run over by a bus tomorrow morning, what is it
[Guest]: that I would really regret not having done, you know, and I didn't think I'd answer wasn't that I
[Guest]: wish I'd bought a bigger BMW or a bigger house or a big or more stock options or more money. I
[Guest]: that didn't. And this is not trying to sound immodest. I didn't have a BMW to start with. But
[Guest]: that was not the point. It didn't, didn't excite me. It wasn't why I thought, wow, that's what's
[Guest]: going to be cool. For me, the cool bit was, wow, I'd love to go out and be this guy who writes a
[Guest]: lot more, who speaks a lot more. My ideal, my world had this, this lovely image of my grandchild
[Guest]: climbing up an attic and pulling out a book and saying, you know what, my granddad wrote this, you
[Guest]: know, just that feeling of saying, maybe there's a legacy there. The fact that, you know, market
[Guest]: cap went up in my business and our investors made more money or that market share went up or that
[Guest]: we launched this terrific product. All of that seemed to pale into insignificance in a sense to
[Guest]: say that. And this is not to say that's not important. It's just that to me, that didn't seem
[Guest]: like the big deal. For me, it felt like what a life it could be. I'd have so much fun. It wouldn't
[Guest]: be work for me if I could just go out and speak about stuff that I'm passionate about. Life would
[Guest]: be so good for me if I could go out and write the stuff that I seem to be enjoying. And if I can use
[Guest]: some of what I've learned to help other people get just a bit better. And that's where perhaps this
[Guest]: coaching bit, you know, it was a bug that had bitten me much earlier. And I trained to become a
[Guest]: coach just to say that, can I help formalize a process by which I can help other people to get
[Guest]: just a bit better than they might be? So this really looked like what I want to do. And then, of
[Guest]: course, you know, came the conversation with the spouse, with my wife, and she was usually
[Guest]: supportive. And I did tell her, look, I'm going to do this not because it's going to make money for
[Guest]: us. I'm assuming that I, if I don't make a penny from here, my CA has told me that, look, don't
[Guest]: worry, you know, we wouldn't have to kind of be on the, you know, we don't worry about food,
[Guest]: clothing, and shelter. And indeed, that little holiday and that little whatever else that is our
[Guest]: indulgence. Don't worry about it. But it's not like we can suddenly say, now I want a bigger
[Guest]: home and I want more and more and more. That's not going to happen. But I'm going to have fun. I
[Guest]: think I love this. Yeah. And that's how I think the transition. So the transition happened by the
[Guest]: time there were two books out. I had been speaking for nothing. I mean, I wouldn't make a penny out
[Guest]: of my speaking, but I could see that what I was doing could also could also get me, you know,
[Guest]: could pay the bills, could make some money. But really the driver was that's what I thought I
[Guest]: wanted to be. You know, my chance at being Prakash Iyer, that one that one little purpose for
[Guest]: which maybe, maybe I was meant to do. That's that's what it sounded like for me.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, that's a that's a lovely story about your passion shifting from one P to another, from
[Amit Varma]: Pepsi to Prakash. And it strikes me that just in this story of your life, there are life lessons
[Amit Varma]: for people to learn. In fact, one of which is a chapter in your book and is also something
[Amit Varma]: coincidentally that I spoke about last week when I did an episode on creators with Roshan Abbas,
[Amit Varma]: where one of the things we chatted about was the importance of quantity over quality, not in so
[Amit Varma]: many words. This is, you know, I got these exact words from your chapter on the subject. And, you
[Amit Varma]: know, you spoke about the advice you got to speak 200 times. And similarly, I mentioned to Roshan
[Amit Varma]: how I was struck by the YouTuber Ali Abdaal's advice to young YouTubers that for you know, make
[Amit Varma]: 200 videos, literally two videos a week for two years. Before you look at the metrics, just do
[Amit Varma]: that and just the constant iteration will make you better. And you've got a great chapter on this,
[Amit Varma]: which you begin with a lovely quote by GK Chesterton, quote, anything worth doing is worth
[Amit Varma]: doing badly, stop quote. And then you give a great example of the ceramic pots. You know, you read
[Amit Varma]: it as did I a long time ago from this book called Art and Fear by David Bales and Ted Orland, as
[Amit Varma]: you pointed out. And it's a fantastic experiment with a key lesson at the end of it. So you want
[Amit Varma]: to repeat for my listeners what it is and the lesson that we then arrive at?
[Guest]: Yeah, so one of the things that fascinates me is this, we all get told that something is better
[Guest]: than something else. And that becomes like a norm. And what I want to do is to tell ourselves that
[Guest]: maybe that's the norm, but learn to challenge it. And it may not always be the case and look for
[Guest]: where the outliers might be. And an example of that was this thing that we've always heard, right?
[Guest]: Quality is better than quantity. I mean, we've used it to our own advantage. I'm sure, you know,
[Guest]: we can all relate to this quality over quantity. And this is an experiment in a ceramics class,
[Guest]: apparently, where the teacher decides that she does an experiment. She says that you'd be judged
[Guest]: in this class at the end of the term on one of two parameters. You could either go for the quality
[Guest]: route or for the quantity route, which is very simple. If you take the quality option, you can
[Guest]: spend the next term making your best pot and come back. And at the end of it, if your pot is perfect,
[Guest]: you'll get an A. If it's good, you'll get a B. If it's not so good, a C. And if it's terrible, a D.
[Guest]: And in the other case, if you had to go the quantity route, what you would need to do is,
[Guest]: I'll bring a weighing machine at the end of the term. And all the pots you've made will be put
[Guest]: on the weighing machine. If you've made more than 70 kilos, you get an A. If it's 50 kilos,
[Guest]: you get a B. If it's 30, you get a C, etc, etc. The interesting bit, of course, is that some
[Guest]: students chose the quality route and some the quantity route. And at the end of the term,
[Guest]: what they found was that the finest pot that emerged in class, the finest set of pots that
[Guest]: emerged were not from the quality group. They were from the quantity group. The kids who were
[Guest]: focused on delivering this great pot were thinking of the great pot, dreaming of that great pot,
[Guest]: idealizing what's the right material, reading up on it and trying to say, how do I make that
[Guest]: perfect pot? And that pot was nowhere near as good as the kids who chose the quantity route,
[Guest]: who said, make it, it's going to take 70 kilos. So like, you keep making pot after pot after pot,
[Guest]: and as you do it, you get better. And as you get better, your pots suddenly start to look
[Guest]: even better. So that by the time you're getting to that 60 and 70 kilos, your pots were far better
[Guest]: than the group that had set out to make the perfect pot. And I think it's such a powerful
[Guest]: lesson for us. And whether it's videos on YouTube, as Ali Abdaal will tell you, whether it is writing,
[Guest]: as the great Amit Verma will tell you, or whether it's speaking, as Brian Tracy might have told,
[Guest]: you know, I think just going after quantity, being willing to make mistakes,
[Guest]: being willing to get it horribly wrong, but just learning from it can actually help us to get
[Amit Varma]: to get to a better place. Yeah. And as you've said in the book, quantity leads to quality.
[Amit Varma]: So my advice to any creator out there is don't don't overthink it. Like on one hand, it is,
[Amit Varma]: of course, true what Lincoln says that if I am going to cut a tree, I'll spend six hours
[Amit Varma]: sharpening the axe. And again, you quote that in your book, and I use that in some of my slides as
[Amit Varma]: well. But so preparation and all of that is important. But at some point, there is a balance
[Amit Varma]: to be drawn between getting it done and getting it right. And I keep talking about the straight
[Amit Varma]: off in our lives. And I think in my own life, in fact, for most of it, I have made the mistake of,
[Amit Varma]: you know, thinking about getting it right, and therefore never getting anything done.
[Amit Varma]: And I think what's important is that you have to first get it done and getting it done again and
[Amit Varma]: again and again is actually the route to sort of getting it right. The other thing that struck me
[Amit Varma]: as very interesting is that when you made your year end list 99 2000, whatever, all these year
[Amit Varma]: end lists that you're making, you said you would put things like waistline 32, or golf handicap,
[Amit Varma]: x number, or write a book. And those are all goals. And as we both know, by now,
[Amit Varma]: you know, it's thinking in terms of goals doesn't help you thinking in terms of processes does,
[Amit Varma]: where you're, you know, you build a process and the goals kind of happen by themselves, and they
[Amit Varma]: fall into place. I'm very curious to know what your processes were like, not just in this later
[Amit Varma]: phase of your career. But even earlier, when you were in the corporate world, like in terms of work
[Amit Varma]: ethic, what kind of processes do you build for yourself? Are you building similar processes in
[Amit Varma]: terms of reading and taking ideas? You know, what do you do for knowledge management at a time where
[Amit Varma]: perhaps there weren't any apps or fancy software for it? What do you do now? What are your processes
[Amit Varma]: through which, you know, you write these books, do these courses, you're obviously constantly
[Amit Varma]: modifying your content. You've just started a YouTube channel as well, which I'll link from
[Amit Varma]: the show notes. So Godspeed for that. What will you tell me about your processes? That's what
[Guest]: really interests me. I like the point you make about how those lists that I had were goals and
[Guest]: not processes. And clearly, I didn't know better as it were. And that's probably why I put them
[Guest]: there. And I didn't actually put down that, you know, write four times every week or take golf
[Guest]: lessons every week or watch your diet, which is really the better way to get to the goals that I
[Guest]: might have had. But I guess the goals were at least served a purpose, which is they kept me in
[Guest]: focus of saying, what do I need to do to get there and maybe just get better with it. In terms of
[Guest]: processes, maybe there are a couple of things that have become habits. So as a young manager,
[Guest]: I remember if you walked into a boss's in the good old days when laptops were still, you know,
[Guest]: not yet around us. If you walked into your boss's room for a meeting or a discussion,
[Guest]: if you walked to any meeting, it was expected that you would carry a pen and a pad with you.
[Guest]: You couldn't be walking in, flaring your hands and sitting over there and looking at the world.
[Guest]: You had to have that pen and paper because if there was something that you needed to do,
[Guest]: you would write it down. If there was something interesting you found, you'd write it down. If
[Guest]: you saw a statistic, which was interesting, you'd put that down on a piece of paper. And I think
[Guest]: that is something in some ways that has stayed with me. I don't trust my memory. And I guess
[Guest]: over time, it just seems to be getting worse. And therefore, I think the need to write down
[Guest]: something is a big one for me. And what I've done, Amit, is often if I see something interesting,
[Guest]: or if I see a line, which might be an interesting one, or I hear something which is interesting,
[Guest]: I will write it down. And I will then try and figure out, I may not even write everything,
[Guest]: but I'll write enough of that line to be able to say, I know what this was. And very often,
[Guest]: stories that I might share or ideas that I might propagate come from those little lines that might
[Guest]: have actually cropped up somewhere. So this is really the crudest form. And then that became
[Guest]: notes. And then, you know, I use Evernote, which I find is useful. I know that there are,
[Guest]: you know, I'm a big fan of the idea of building a second brain, but I just find it too complicated.
[Guest]: And I want to tell myself that maybe at this stage of my life, I don't want the process to hijack
[Guest]: my agenda. And I don't want to be so caught up in saying I must get the better process.
[Guest]: So long as I have something that works for me, and serves my purpose, I'm saying, you know,
[Guest]: this is good enough, you know, and I don't really need to move to Notion or, you know,
[Guest]: or something. That's the way I see it. The other thing I've done in terms of processes,
[Guest]: and I said this to you earlier, that I like the idea of being able to kind of share what I have
[Guest]: heard or learned, which is new for me. And therefore, a lot of my conversations with friends,
[Guest]: with other people who might be around me, family, whoever I meet, I will often share. Very often,
[Guest]: I'll tell my, if I'm driving in a car, I'll tell the driver, something that I might have read,
[Guest]: because I think it might be interesting. And maybe this is again, good old Hindustan
[Guest]: lever training at work, which is to say, test your ideas, test market new launches.
[Guest]: You know, don't try and suddenly say you've got this great idea. And one day I'll go and say,
[Guest]: big bang, here it is. So I like the idea of being able to test it out. So I might even make a,
[Guest]: I might even put it out on a LinkedIn post and just put out the kernel of an idea and say,
[Guest]: see, how do people respond? Sometimes you'll figure that you got it wrong, or that there's
[Guest]: a logical error in what you're saying, or people think this is rubbish, but you learn that bit
[Guest]: before you actually take it out to the larger world. So that's something else that I find
[Guest]: extremely useful, which is to share whatever I have. And that helps me to get some kind of
[Guest]: instant feedback, test market results, as it were, in terms of saying, does this make sense?
[Guest]: Is there an idea here? Very often, putting an idea out actually gets back a bigger idea.
[Guest]: You put out something which you don't know how it will work, and you just put it out there,
[Guest]: and somebody else will make something else out of it. Maybe people will see it very differently
[Guest]: from the way you might have seen it. And just getting that fresh perspective, just getting a
[Guest]: new idea, suddenly says, hey, I had an idea, I can put these two together, and now I have an
[Guest]: even better idea than what I might have had. So that's something else that works.
[Amit Varma]: Can you give me an example of that?
[Guest]: So I'm just thinking, I wrote something in my second book, I think, about lessons from a tea
[Guest]: bag. And I think I had like, you know, leadership lessons from a tea bag. And this was born out of
[Guest]: a line somewhere about how I read something is like a tea bag, put it in hot water, and you'll
[Guest]: know how strong it really is. And that's such a powerful idea. And I said, now this is like
[Guest]: sounding like a leadership idea. And then I kind of looked at what are the other lessons from it.
[Guest]: And I had five lessons. And I'm just thinking aloud now, but it would be things like, you know,
[Guest]: the bag of the tea bag needs to be porous. You can have the best tea inside, but if the bag is
[Guest]: not porous, it won't work. Suggesting therefore, as a leader that you might have all the ideas and
[Guest]: knowledge, but you need to be porous, need to share, need to get it right. I had things like
[Guest]: saying at the end of a cup of tea, nobody ever said, wow, what a great tea bag that was. We'd
[Guest]: say it was good tea. So, you know, as a leader, don't worry about being recognized as this great
[Guest]: leader. Don't worry about being, you know, 40 under 40 cover of the magazine, et cetera, et
[Guest]: cetera, focus on building great teams, focus on building great organizations, focus on impacting
[Guest]: other people. That's what people will remember. No one's going to say, wow, that is a great tea
[Guest]: bag. So, you know, I had these four or five lessons. What I discovered was that as I started
[Guest]: talking about it, you know, in the early years, people got fascinated. And suddenly when I finished,
[Guest]: somebody will come and say, you know what, I can think of one more lesson, sir.
[Guest]: And somebody will come up with another one and another one. And today I probably have like 10
[Guest]: lessons from it, which are probably very different from the four I might have started off with when
[Guest]: I, when I, when I got this going. So it's just a case of literally now the word became popular
[Guest]: much later, but, you know, crowdsourcing ideas suddenly started to happen. Wow. Fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me now about your writing process, because you've mentioned that you were a reader when you
[Amit Varma]: were a kid, you like to write, you know, you enjoyed writing essays, when you were in IAMA,
[Amit Varma]: you did your, the magazine that you edited, and which I presume you also wrote for.
[Amit Varma]: How did your writing develop over this period of time? Like right now, it's very crisp, it's clear
[Amit Varma]: writing it, you know, it does a wonderful job of communicating ideas of storytelling, there is no
[Amit Varma]: jargon, it's simple, everyone can understand. Was it always like this? Is there a journey that you
[Amit Varma]: took to arriving at this? Did you consciously think about what your writing voice should be like?
[Guest]: Give me a bit of insight into that part of your process. First up, of course, getting a writing
[Guest]: guru to say that he thinks this writing is pretty good is like, I'll take that. Amit, thanks so much.
[Guest]: Thanks for those kind words. I must confess, I didn't read too much fiction as a kid.
[Guest]: A lot of my reading was magazines, was nonfiction, newspapers. So if you ask me who were some of my
[Guest]: favorite writers as a kid growing up, I would like to say I was a big fan of Dilip Bobb,
[Guest]: who would write for India Today, you know, and I thought he wrote such a great job of it, or
[Guest]: a lot of Arun Shourie and his research and his writing in newspapers at that time, I was a big
[Guest]: fan of that kind of stuff. So for me, reading some of this was what got me excited. And I think at
[Guest]: some level, keeping it simple was important. I like to say this, I give a lot of credit to my
[Guest]: English teachers in school, perhaps, and I'd probably call out, you know, there was a lady
[Guest]: called Ottie D'Souza, and there was Sujata Mitra. And what they did for me was to say that, look,
[Guest]: it's the idea that matters. It's not about using big words. It's about how can you get that idea
[Guest]: across to people who may not be familiar with what you're trying to say. And I think for me,
[Guest]: simplicity therefore became pretty much what I wanted to do. And I'd like to say this, that I
[Guest]: sometimes think it's actually very self-serving. If it was complicated, I wouldn't understand it.
[Guest]: If I use big words, I probably wouldn't understand it. And that has kept me on track.
[Guest]: It kept me on track to say that, you know, use words that you understand, use words that
[Guest]: your reader would understand. I also think that, I don't think I consciously thought of my writing
[Guest]: voice, but because I also speak, and I, like I said, a lot of my writing also stems from having
[Guest]: shared that story or having told something. So I often think that I write like I speak.
[Guest]: And, and therefore, when I'm writing, I'm not thinking, oh, I'm now writing a book or now this
[Guest]: has to be serious. I still think I'm talking to someone and I picture my reader, which could be
[Guest]: when my first book, when I wrote my first book, I thought of my 18 or 20 year old kids to say,
[Guest]: I'm talking to them. What would I do? I would not use, I wouldn't use big words if I'm talking to
[Guest]: them. And I kept it that way. I like short sentences because it keeps it simple for me
[Guest]: to ensure that I don't have to worry about grammar and syntax and saying, have you got this right?
[Guest]: Or is that last part of the sentence fitting into the first, keep your sentences shorter,
[Guest]: and you take away the problem of trying to figure that out. So I think my writing style, therefore,
[Guest]: has always been about keeping it simple, keeping, making it sound like you're listening to me.
[Guest]: And maybe without, like I said, without consciously realizing it, I, I'd like to believe that that's
[Guest]: the way it should be for me. If, if someone reads what I've written, they must feel that I'm
[Guest]: talking to them. And I'm, I'm, I'm having a chat with them, not even talking to them. I'm having,
[Guest]: we're having this conversation. I'm trying to tell them a story. And that's really what you'll
[Guest]: get over here. I probably learned this also earlier on that this is the idea of why am I
[Guest]: writing? This was not to try and impress somebody. It was not to try and tell somebody, look,
[Guest]: everyone, look, I'm so cool. I can write so well, or, you know, look, everyone, I can use such big
[Guest]: words. That was not the intent. The intent was to say, you know what, I have something interesting
[Guest]: to tell you. And let me try and tell you something, which I think is interesting. Now that was the
[Guest]: brief in a sense to say, keep it interesting. You have an interesting story to tell, make sure it's
[Guest]: interesting for the other person. The other person doesn't have to tax her head and scratch your
[Guest]: brains to figure out what happened. Oh, sorry. What was this? What's, how does this fit in?
[Guest]: And keep it simple for them. One last thought, which is, and I think I'm trying to now trace
[Guest]: this back and, you know, it's easy to keep looking back and saying, where did this start? But
[Guest]: I wonder if as a little kid, being this kid who would try and pun too much, you know,
[Guest]: would try and, you know, and everyone hates a punster and it can be a pain in the neck.
[Guest]: And, you know, you can be, your pun is indeed lowest form of humor and all of that.
[Guest]: But I used to be this kind of guy who would always see something else in that word. And I would
[Guest]: always see another, if somebody said something, I would probably say, that's what you're saying,
[Guest]: but here's what it could mean. And I think this, this tendency to listen to that song in Hindi and
[Guest]: to quickly try and say, how would this sound if it had English lyrics, right? What would it do?
[Guest]: This ability to look at something and say, what does this tell us about the larger world? Maybe
[Guest]: that is something else that has kind of become what gets me going in my writing, where I try and say
[Guest]: that, look, maybe there's a lesson to be learned here. Maybe there's something that's important
[Guest]: here, but it comes from something else which is happening. And I try and bring that to life and
[Guest]: say, hey, if that's what it is, how does this, what does this tell us about, about life, about
[Guest]: relationships, about leadership, about the way we are, about the way we behave, the way we think.
[Guest]: I try and see if I can find lessons in that. And maybe that's something else that that's kind of
[Guest]: seeped into the storytelling that I, that I enjoy doing. Yeah. Yeah. That's, that's kind of
[Amit Varma]: fascinating number of things to take away there. And one which I find particularly interesting is
[Amit Varma]: this notion that your mindfulness of language can increase because you were a punner. Like I also,
[Amit Varma]: of course, don't approve of puns and very often it's just the writer drawing attention to their
[Amit Varma]: writing, which detracts from the narrative and you don't really want that. But at the same time,
[Amit Varma]: it's important and it's important for writers, especially to look at with granular detail at
[Amit Varma]: the language that they are using and to have a sense of what effect their language has on the
[Amit Varma]: reader, because every choice that is made in a particular piece has an effect on the reader and
[Amit Varma]: you want to be mindful of that. So this is an interesting angle, that tendency for sort of
[Amit Varma]: fancy writing, doing, you know, writerly florid prose. I think perhaps I have often mused comes
[Amit Varma]: from that old post-colonial hangover, where for decades, and to some extent, even now,
[Amit Varma]: English was a marker of class and, you know, in India, and if you wanted to signal your
[Amit Varma]: sophistication, you do it with these big, fancy, pompous phrases, instead of saying,
[Amit Varma]: you know, stop this nonsense, you'll say, put an end to this pontificatory blah, blah, blah, and
[Amit Varma]: so on and so forth. And again, right as you speak is something I talk a lot about, because I think
[Amit Varma]: people misunderstand it. People think that right as you speak means that the way that we are speaking,
[Amit Varma]: you write like that. And obviously, that won't work, because there'll be all these long run
[Amit Varma]: on sentences, there'll be these sort of pauses and ums and ahs and words like like and whatever,
[Amit Varma]: because when we are speaking, there's no filter between our brains and what we are saying, which
[Amit Varma]: is fine, because we are saying it in the moment. What right as you speak really means is that when
[Amit Varma]: you read something out, it should sound as if it is something that you would say in conversation,
[Amit Varma]: it should sound natural to you, which is why for most of the writers that I read, including you,
[Amit Varma]: most of the writers that I know personally, rather, including you, you know, when I read
[Amit Varma]: something by them, I can actually hear it in their voice, because it is so sort of natural to them.
[Amit Varma]: And I think people lose this people try to be like, too writerly and like I think William Zinsser
[Amit Varma]: once said that if there is a word that you would not use in conversation, never use it in your
[Amit Varma]: writing. And I agree with that, you know, so all great points and great lessons in there.
[Guest]: I must ask you a question here Amit and something that I've not really thought too deeply about,
[Guest]: but I've sometimes wondered. So when I went to school in and I learned English, I've never
[Guest]: studied Ren and Martin and grammar and I've I didn't really understand what, you know, past
[Guest]: perfect and, you know, all the terms that we use to describe, I've never studied or learned that.
[Guest]: And I find it fascinating that without having learned that, as it were, I learned how to read
[Guest]: and write a little bit. And I'm just wondering, how does this fit in with this whole thing about
[Guest]: saying that if you need to know something, you need to understand the science behind it, perhaps,
[Amit Varma]: or is how does this work? I actually think that taking Ren and Martin too seriously, for example,
[Amit Varma]: might be counterproductive, because what each of these grammar books or write like this books will
[Amit Varma]: give you is an ossified version of language is a convention of a previous time. I think the way we
[Amit Varma]: learn everything is by reading a lot. There's no substitute for that we learn how to write by
[Amit Varma]: osmosis by reading a lot. And that reading can be mindful, where you know, Arundhati Roy,
[Amit Varma]: after she won the Booker in 96 for the God of small things once said that the quality of a
[Amit Varma]: reading changed when she became a writer, which means that you're looking for all the things that
[Amit Varma]: writers do, the tricks they use, how they build rhythm, how they do transitions, how they tell
[Amit Varma]: their stories, all of those things. But for me, any kind of reading is great, even mindless reading,
[Amit Varma]: like I'll often tell participants of my course that do not become very conscious about what you
[Amit Varma]: are reading or think that some things are infrared and some things are things that you should read,
[Amit Varma]: read anything that you enjoy reading, because anything that you enjoy reading is by default
[Amit Varma]: doing something right. And you learn osmosis from that. So whenever somebody asked me, how do I
[Amit Varma]: improve my grammar? How do I improve my vocabulary? The answer always is that there is no instruction
[Amit Varma]: book which will teach you all of this, you just read a lot. And you kind of learn it by osmosis,
[Amit Varma]: which is why I'm never critical of a person whose grammar isn't great, who are making grammatical
[Amit Varma]: errors, or who's may not know many big words, I'm never critical of them, because those are
[Amit Varma]: things that you pick up along the way. What is more important is the honesty in your storytelling
[Amit Varma]: that are you putting yourself at the service of your narrative? Or are you trying to impress
[Amit Varma]: somebody with Oh, look what a good writer I am, I know all these big words and fancy phrases.
[Amit Varma]: So yeah, so my short answer, I gave a long answer. But the short answer would really be
[Amit Varma]: that we learn by osmosis. So tell me about this particular book, you know, you've referred in
[Amit Varma]: this book to things that at some points, you'll say April 2020, this happened, or, you know,
[Amit Varma]: you've referred to the lockdown and the pandemic times and all of that. How did the idea for this
[Amit Varma]: book kind of come about, you know, and what was the process of writing it like? And is there
[Amit Varma]: something that this book has gained from being written after the pandemic began? When let us say
[Amit Varma]: that, you know, the old normal became the new normal, that is such a cliche, I even feel embarrassed
[Amit Varma]: using these phrases. But you know, is there something in the book that was formed because of
[Guest]: that period? The first bit is that as my Penguin editor will tell you that the pandemic ensured
[Guest]: that I wrote the book. So it's been a fairly long time in the works. And it's been an idea.
[Guest]: But I guess when the pandemic hit, and you suddenly realize that you have a little more
[Guest]: time on your hands, you're at home, I think it just took away one more excuse. And as I looked at,
[Guest]: so if I flashback to April last year, and I told myself that the world is changing a little bit,
[Guest]: no more travel, no more having to be on flights all the time, you're at home, you're doing everything
[Guest]: sitting in front of a computer. So it's a great opportunity to do a few things. And those few
[Guest]: things included learning new stuff. So I said, Hey, what can you learn? So I tried to learn two
[Guest]: or three things that that might have helped. And I told myself, not a bad idea to say, let's finish
[Guest]: the book now. So let's get that book out and start writing. So I think that the discipline probably
[Guest]: got a little got some impetus, thanks to the pandemic. Did that in any other way, influence
[Guest]: what I do? I think a lot of it goes back to my little attempt to try and say that I actually
[Guest]: think there are things people need to know. And we don't get taught those things. And sometimes
[Guest]: just being just a little thing someone tells you can make it so much more powerful. I'll give an
[Guest]: example. And I'm not saying this because I'm on your podcast, Amit. But just this, it never struck
[Guest]: me that adverbs are bad until I took that course. And, you know, and to answer that question about
[Guest]: Atul Berede and Sachin Tendulkar and all of that, I think if you don't get your hand in line with
[Guest]: your foot, no matter who you are, you're going to be in trouble. And I just think that one little
[Guest]: thing told me so much about my own writing. And I used to feel bad when I'd get rid of those
[Guest]: adverbs. I thought they were adding so much to my writing, to realizing that, you know,
[Guest]: it's such a drag, just take it off. Horror of horrors. I did a count once after I wrote something
[Guest]: and I had something like in a 700 word piece, I used the word just 14 times, you know, just like
[Guest]: that. And I thought it sounded just right. And anybody who said it's not right, I'd say, you
[Guest]: know, you must be just kidding. You know, and I didn't realize it. So that's my point. Sometimes
[Guest]: you're not aware of some of these things and it's not. And I could turn around and say that this
[Guest]: isn't rocket science. And, you know, surely someone I could have picked it up, et cetera,
[Guest]: et cetera. But the problem is there are some simple things that we need to know about what we do.
[Guest]: And no one tells us that yet. And it just so happens that no one tells us. If we knew it,
[Guest]: it could make a difference to our life. And it's not to suggest that this is the one thing you need
[Guest]: to do and this will change your world. That's not the intent. These are small things that I think we
[Guest]: all need to know. And that's really what got me started on saying, so what are some of the things
[Guest]: that I might have learned, which I think could be useful? And that's how I started to write.
[Guest]: Um, I think a good, a good practice in this was also to say that push yourself to write.
[Guest]: And I wish I'd be a little more consistent, but some of the best moments I've had or the best
[Guest]: months I've had are when I would tell myself that I will write something every day on LinkedIn,
[Guest]: you know, I would just post something. And here's the interesting bit, and this is true,
[Guest]: whether you're, you know, if you want to write a book or if you tell yourself that you will write
[Guest]: posts on whatever's your medium of choice, if you sit down on the first day to write,
[Guest]: you will say, I have nothing to write about. There are no ideas and there will be no ideas.
[Guest]: And then you can get up and go and say, I have no idea. So I'm not going to write today.
[Guest]: But if you force yourself to sit there and say, failure is not an option. You, there is no cop
[Guest]: out. Okay. You have to write that piece today, which could be a hundred words or 200 words or
[Guest]: whatever it is, but you have to write it. And suddenly something will come to your mind and
[Guest]: you'll write a 30, 40 words, which will be rubbish. But those 30, 40 words will tell you
[Guest]: that actually there is another idea coming from here and that will then become a piece.
[Guest]: And by the time you're finishing, you don't want to get up because you think you've got something
[Guest]: really nice happening over here and you want to kind of stay with it. And there is another idea
[Guest]: that you've got from here. And, and I think that can become a great way to tell yourself that,
[Guest]: Hey, this book can happen. And for me, very often, if I sat there and said, I need to write a book,
[Guest]: I can't decide what to write about. And it's not like the book started by saying,
[Guest]: I have a great title. How come no one told me that all I have to do is to think of stories
[Guest]: that will fit into that. That's not how it happened. I just had to think of what can I say.
[Guest]: And gradually I think one thing leads to another and to another and to another,
[Guest]: and all of that happens because you tell yourself you have to sit and write.
[Guest]: And I think to anybody out there who wants to write a book, and I often, you know,
[Guest]: I'm sure this is advice you also gave us and you give everybody, which is to say,
[Guest]: if you want to write a book first, just write. We worry about, will I find a publisher?
[Guest]: Will the book sell? You know, how is distribution? What are royalties? How much margin?
[Guest]: Forget all of that. If you want to write a book first, just write. The rest of it will take care
[Guest]: of itself. And I think if we can do anything, and maybe this is true, not just for writing,
[Guest]: it's true for anything else. I'll give you another one, Amit. And, you know, after one of my books,
[Guest]: I was in Kathmandu for a Nepal Lit Fest. Rare occasion when someone who's written an ordinary
[Guest]: book on non-fiction gets called to a Lit Fest. But for me, the high point was that Shobha Dey
[Guest]: was there. And she was a fellow speaker at that Lit Fest, which also meant that, you know,
[Guest]: the budget's being small for the organizer. They had one car to ferry us from one place to another.
[Guest]: You know, I wasn't complaining and I'm hoping Shobha wasn't either. But as I was talking to
[Guest]: her, she said something, you know, we all, you know, and again, I'm saying this as a young kid,
[Guest]: I thought Shobha Dey was this great, you know, was a fabulous woman. And whether it was Celebrity
[Guest]: Magazine, which she started, or just Neeta's Natter and Stardust, and all of that. Forget
[Guest]: the books. I thought she was just terrific. And a big fan of all that she did. And you know,
[Guest]: a little bit about her, you know, the books she writes, her husband, society, she's obviously
[Guest]: this, you know, socialite, all of that. And I'm sitting over there with her and we're talking
[Guest]: about something and she tells me something. She says, you know what, Prakash, I write 3,000 words
[Guest]: every day. It is a must. It could be a column. It could be a book. It could be a piece that
[Guest]: somebody has commissioned. It could be notes to myself. But I will write 3,000 words every day.
[Guest]: I will not go to bed if I haven't written 3,000 words. And then I can picture her saying this.
[Guest]: And she says, it's like Riyaz for a singer. You know, if you have to be a singer, you have to do
[Guest]: your Riyaz. For me, this is my Riyaz. And here I am running a company and writing a book and
[Guest]: thinking, you know, this is all cool. And I say, wow, this is such a powerful thought. And every
[Guest]: time I tell my, now when I try to write and I'm thinking of an excuse, I think of saying,
[Guest]: my diary is not half as busy as Shobha's diary might be. And if she can find time to write those
[Amit Varma]: 3,000 words, you know, what's my excuse? Yeah. And in fact, that's both something to learn from
[Amit Varma]: and something not to learn from there. And what one can learn from there is, of course, the
[Amit Varma]: importance of Riyaz. Like I keep saying, like, to me, the facility to write is like, it's akin
[Amit Varma]: to a muscle. So if you want to grow your writing muscle, you know, you have to do what you do to
[Amit Varma]: grow your other muscles. You don't take a gym membership and without going to the gym by having
[Amit Varma]: an intellectual understanding of how the body works, grow your muscles. You got to go to the
[Amit Varma]: gym every day and get the job done. Similar thing with writing. However, 3,000 words a day is
[Amit Varma]: intimidating. Like the advice that I give in my course, and I have a slide just for this,
[Amit Varma]: spoiler for those who haven't attended it yet, is set a really modest target. Like what I say is
[Amit Varma]: 300 words a day or even 200 words a day. You know, just write 200 words a day. And the thing with
[Amit Varma]: that is that many days you'll write more than that. Many days you will be in a difficult situation
[Amit Varma]: where you have fever and you're in bed or you have flights to catch in a post-COVID world,
[Amit Varma]: obviously. And you know, but you can still take out your phone and write those 200 words on your
[Amit Varma]: smartphone. And in fact, since I started speaking after you finished, I've probably spoken twice as
[Amit Varma]: much. We speak around 200 words in a minute. It's very easy to write. But what it does, and even if
[Amit Varma]: you have nothing to write about, write a daily journal, write about what's been happening in
[Amit Varma]: your life. The point is, number one, the juices are flowing, the muscle is working out. Number two,
[Amit Varma]: it accumulates. Even if you write exactly 200 a day, and nobody will obviously stop at the 200th
[Amit Varma]: word if it's and or but. But even if you were to write that much, that's 75,000 words in a year.
[Amit Varma]: That's like a novel length thing, you know. So the important thing is, like you correctly said,
[Amit Varma]: just get out there, just do it every day. The process is what matters. The goals will happen
[Guest]: by themselves. I know you said this, Amit, and I remember you telling us in this course,
[Guest]: why 200 words is an important one was, I remember you said, even if you're going back to the airport
[Guest]: after a meeting, you know, 200 words is something you can type out onto your phone, right? So you
[Guest]: just take away the excuse for not writing. And I think that's a great start. But here's the
[Guest]: interesting bit. I have found that once you get into the swim of things, once you get into the
[Guest]: habit, you start saying, wow, there is more to say, there is more you want to do, and that 200
[Guest]: will soon become 500. And once you become class five, it'll become 700. And then if you become
[Guest]: postgraduate, like Shobha probably is, it becomes 3000 words. But the second bit I want to say here
[Guest]: is that apart from the writing bit, the big problem most of us have is when you sit down,
[Guest]: you wonder, I have nothing to say, I have nothing to write, what will I write about? Right? And
[Guest]: that becomes a reason. So we wait for once I have something to write about, then I will sit and
[Guest]: write. And I'm saying, maybe you want to switch that, sit to write, and something will come to
[Guest]: you. It may not have been there. I have found this happens to me so many times, you know, and
[Guest]: there'll be days when I say, gosh, I haven't written, I must write today, I'll get up in the
[Guest]: morning, and I'll tell my wife, I have to write, I'm not going for a walk in the morning, 5am,
[Guest]: I'm sitting at my desk here. I don't know what I'm going to do. But I'm sitting over there,
[Guest]: and I'm saying, I need to write. And surprise, surprise, something will come. And I think that's
[Guest]: something else that maybe, you know, anybody who wants to write to try and figure this don't wait
[Guest]: for that idea. And I'll tell you another little story. I mean, I once was, I was on a flight,
[Guest]: and the gentleman sitting next to me and this is the good old days when you know, I'm still
[Guest]: corporate and jet airways is still a thing and business class is still a thing. And I surprise,
[Guest]: surprise, there's this man sitting next to me who looks very much like Gulzar. And, you know,
[Guest]: before I know it, the lady who's serving us gives him the glass of fresh lime and says,
[Guest]: is there anything I can get you, Gulzar sahib? And I think my flight is made, I'm gonna really
[Guest]: gonna enjoy this one. And I find that, you know, Gulzar sahib has this diary, like a loose leaf
[Guest]: diary, a handbook of sorts, which he's got with him. And he plonks that into the pocket in front,
[Guest]: as even as he settles into a seat. And I'm curious, and I asked him, you know,
[Guest]: why have you got that diary? And he's got a pen, nice looking fountain pens. And I said,
[Guest]: is that because mid flight, you might have this great idea, or a line might occur to you and you
[Guest]: don't want to lose it, so you want to write it down? Is that why you have that? He says,
[Guest]: I have to deliver three songs by the end of the day. And I have work to do. So, I have to sit
[Guest]: and write. It's not like I'll wait for an idea. If I write, I might get an idea. You know,
[Guest]: and I think that's a, if it happens to someone as great as Gulzar, maybe it's an interesting one
[Guest]: for all of us to consider that don't wait for inspiration to strike before you write. Sit
[Amit Varma]: down to write and I think inspiration will find you. Yeah, in fact, in my course, I have a slide
[Amit Varma]: which has a quote by Joan Didion where she says, quote, I don't know what I think until I write it
[Amit Varma]: down. Stop quote. So, you know, even if you have nothing to write about, just, just, you know,
[Amit Varma]: sit, exercise that muscle, and magic will eventually happen. You've got to kind of have
[Amit Varma]: that faith. But don't start with a big target. Start with a small target. The big targets will
[Amit Varma]: happen. 3000 words a day can also happen more than that can happen. Like one of my favorite
[Amit Varma]: writers is a French novelist, Georges Simenon, who wrote some 400 novels in his time, created
[Amit Varma]: the Detective Magret, but also wrote a bunch of I think they're called Roman Adours, which are
[Amit Varma]: these wonderful novels about everyday life. And he gave an interview to Paris Review when he was,
[Amit Varma]: I think, around 50 years old. And his process then was he would call his doc, when he felt ready to
[Amit Varma]: write a novel, the doc would take the blood pressure, give the go ahead. And Simenon would
[Amit Varma]: then lock himself up in a room for seven days, like his wife would leave food outside the door.
[Amit Varma]: And he'd write 7000 words a day. And at the end of a week, he's got around 50,000 words,
[Amit Varma]: send it off to the publisher calls the doctor, doctor comes takes his blood pressure says,
[Amit Varma]: okay, you need to rest till so and so date. And then I will come and check you again. But this
[Amit Varma]: is one of those things which I would say, please do not try this at home. You know, start small
[Amit Varma]: start achievable. Otherwise, you know what a big target does to finish that thought is,
[Amit Varma]: let's say you set yourself a big target, I'll write 1000 words a day also, okay, you set yourself
[Amit Varma]: that target, then you will fall off the wagon, there will be days when you just can't. And then
[Amit Varma]: you start beating yourself up. And then you say, yeah, writing life is not for me,
[Amit Varma]: ya mere se nahi hoga, like my corporate mein toh achcha kama raha ho, why should I do this?
[Amit Varma]: And that affects your self image. And it becomes a vicious cycle, where because you don't write,
[Amit Varma]: you tell yourself you can't write, and that feeds into itself. So the one way to break that is
[Amit Varma]: modest targets. Let's start by talking about your book. And when I read the book, in my mind,
[Amit Varma]: I was sort of dividing it into personal lessons, that is self actualization kind of lessons,
[Amit Varma]: and other lessons, outward facing lessons, like leadership lessons, and team building lessons,
[Amit Varma]: and all of that. And some of it struck me. And what I again, love the how you bring your own
[Amit Varma]: personal stories into these, like to give you a point of feedback for your next book,
[Amit Varma]: the entire book is filled with stories. But there were stories that I really enjoyed were the
[Amit Varma]: personal ones, and not so much, you know, the ones of other people and other things, because
[Amit Varma]: there's just so much charm to them. And one of those stories was, you talk about how you've gone
[Amit Varma]: on a drive with your twins, I think their nicknames are Abby and Toots, I hope they don't
[Amit Varma]: mind, I'm just quoting you. So at one point, when you're going back to the car, your daughter says
[Amit Varma]: that, hey, I want to sit on the right side, because we both sit at the back. And then the
[Amit Varma]: son immediately says, No, no, I want to sit on the right side. And back and forth kind of happens,
[Amit Varma]: and you find a compromise and you get to the car. And when you get to the car, your son says,
[Amit Varma]: by the way, which is the right side, which is such a remarkable story, and which tells you so much
[Amit Varma]: about human nature, that he just wanted to sit on the right side, because that's what his sister
[Amit Varma]: wanted. He didn't even know what the right side was. And similarly, in our lives, we set our goals
[Amit Varma]: and our benchmarks and our desires by what other people around us are doing. And your point there
[Amit Varma]: is be mindful of this and avoid this trap, and so on. Tell me a little bit more about this. And
[Amit Varma]: does this have personal resonance beyond this little story about your kids? Like,
[Amit Varma]: do you think you made this mistake sometimes? And you know, what was the nature of the mistake?
[Guest]: How did you get past it? I think it's such a small, a tiny little story. It actually,
[Guest]: you know, it certainly has reverberations across everything that we do. And it certainly it has
[Guest]: for me, personally speaking, it has for all of us. I think if you look at the number of people who
[Guest]: end up doing engineering, you know, why do they do engineering? And if you look at the way we
[Guest]: select careers, jobs, it's almost like, and I said this at some level, that as a kid, if you're first
[Guest]: in class or second in class, you don't, and like I said, South Indian middle class home, Bombay
[Guest]: school, you don't do arts. You don't do arts. Why? Because it's not the done thing. It's not,
[Guest]: you know, it's not, you do it because everybody wants it. Why do people want something? Because
[Guest]: everybody else wants it. You have hot jobs, you have hot careers, you have employers who are
[Guest]: being sought after, courses being sought after because everybody wants it. We forget whether
[Guest]: it's something that suits our, is that what's going to make me happy? We don't even pause to
[Guest]: think about it. And I think it's, I'm sure it's happened to me in my life. There have been
[Guest]: decisions where you do things because everybody's doing it. You don't want to miss the bus. You
[Guest]: worry that you might miss the bus. I also think that, again, optimist, positive and all of that.
[Guest]: So I don't have too many regrets in my life. And I keep thinking that jo hua, it's taught me
[Guest]: something which has helped me to be where I am today. And therefore, that's been, you know,
[Guest]: value for time and money spent over there. But I do think that in a lot of my decisions, a lot
[Guest]: of our decisions, it's not, I wasn't this young person who kind of said, I don't care. I will do
[Guest]: what my heart says. I will, you know, I don't care. I don't think I was that kind of person.
[Guest]: And it's not easy. I think there are a lot of pressures, but I think just being aware of it
[Guest]: can sometimes make it, you know, if you took 10 decisions, which were of that kind, maybe
[Guest]: awareness that don't do something because other people want it. Don't do something just because
[Guest]: if other people want it, you don't want them to get it. You want to get it before them. If they're,
[Guest]: you know, very often you see this happen in so many ways in our lives that people will get
[Guest]: possessive about something the minute they realize somebody else wants it. They may not have any use
[Guest]: for it, but if somebody else wants it, it suddenly becomes something that we need. You know, and I'm
[Guest]: just imagining in a middle-class home, you know, if you went to your, I hope it doesn't happen too
[Guest]: much, but you know, you can imagine this where you go and say, you know, can I borrow your toaster
[Guest]: for a few? No, just now my daughter's doing a course in making sado bread and all of that. So
[Guest]: we are eating a lot of bread now, so I can't give you the toaster. Actually, I only realized I have
[Guest]: a toaster at home and you asked me for it. But that tells me that I need it. And maybe there's
[Guest]: a mindset thing here that if you want it, maybe it's got value I hadn't seen, and I want to hold
[Guest]: on to it. And that came through for me in something as simple as this to say like, you know, and it
[Guest]: happens to all of us. I think there's, like I say in the book, there's a little bit of that baby Abby
[Guest]: in all of us, you know, who's looking for things without knowing why he wants them, who wants them
[Amit Varma]: because somebody else wants them. No, it's part of human nature. Like there's another story in
[Amit Varma]: your book where you talk about hanging around outside Churchgate just to see how the markets
[Amit Varma]: are functioning. And you look at this textile shop where there are these three, four busy buyers and
[Amit Varma]: they buy something and then many others come and they buy the same things. And on the second day,
[Amit Varma]: you realize that these guys aren't buyers, they're actually pretending to be buyers so that other
[Amit Varma]: people imitate them. And it's kind of worth thinking about these aspects of human nature,
[Amit Varma]: because the moment someone like you points them out, then someone like me can actually
[Amit Varma]: absorb that tendency in myself and can correct for it. So that's kind of invaluable. Another
[Amit Varma]: of the really interesting personal lessons that you have in here is about alteration tailors.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit about this insight and how it struck you.
[Guest]: So it acts like a lot of these ideas or articles, they can stem from a simple,
[Guest]: a silly line I might have read somewhere. And I still remember this was I think in ET.
[Guest]: ET used to have this glossy supplement called Panache, which would have, you know,
[Guest]: good looking people with the top five suit brands and all of that happening in it,
[Guest]: nothing to do with business, but all about this, the glamorous side of business as it were.
[Guest]: There was a column there by a stylist and she talked about her five top tips for,
[Guest]: you know, as style tips. And one of those five tips was get yourself an alteration tailor.
[Guest]: And I thought that was strange, you know, never thought about it. And the rest of it was more
[Guest]: standard stuff about, you know, dressing for the occasion, color, all of that.
[Guest]: Get yourself an alteration tailor sounded odd. And the point she made, and I think in very brief was
[Guest]: that, you know, that alteration tailor will make sure that that shirt sleeve, which is slightly
[Guest]: longer, gets shortened so that it looks smarter with your jacket. That was the kind of thing.
[Guest]: And I thought of that, I said, you know, wow, great idea here.
[Guest]: And how important it is. And in many ways, how we all need an alteration tailor. So it could be to
[Guest]: say sometimes, you know, we all have that shirt lying in our wardrobe, which we don't wear because
[Guest]: one button has gone missing. And therefore, all we wear it and we ensure we fold up, roll up our
[Guest]: sleeves because I can't keep them down because that button is missing. And all it took was maybe
[Guest]: someone who could be an alteration tailor and fix that. It could be this thing about,
[Guest]: you have a trouser, which is, you know, just that half inch too long.
[Guest]: And if it therefore doesn't fall as well as it, it doesn't make you look as smart as it could.
[Guest]: All it takes is someone to just point it out and reduce that half inch. And I took that now to say
[Guest]: that, you know, it's not only about our clothes, it's about us here. We need an alteration tailor
[Guest]: in our lives who will tell us about those little things that we're probably not doing right.
[Guest]: You know, and it's not this grand fix. It's not saying, oh, if I need to get better,
[Guest]: I need to now enroll for the advanced management program at Harvard. That's going to change me. No.
[Guest]: What you sometimes need is a friend, someone close to you who can point out, you know what,
[Guest]: might be a good idea to just pause a little before you kind of lose your cool.
[Guest]: Just relax, you know, or you may not realize it, but you know, the way you say it,
[Guest]: you might be sounding like you are, you know, you are being arrogant about what you know.
[Guest]: These may be small fixes, but you need someone who will tell you that, you know what, there's a
[Guest]: half inch that needs to be adjusted. And here's how you can do it. And having that alteration
[Guest]: tailor in your life is such a powerful thing because you will have somebody who's kind of
[Guest]: watching out for you, who's telling you. And it's sometimes it could also be to say that,
[Guest]: you know what, that shirt you haven't worn because you think it's too tight.
[Guest]: Let me make it all right for you. You can wear it. It's like saying,
[Guest]: maybe you have strengths you haven't leveraged. You're not sure of yourself.
[Guest]: And I'll tell you, you know what, you're very good at that. Every time I've seen you do it,
[Guest]: you do it well. So maybe you want to do more of it. So I just think that little line about saying
[Guest]: an alteration tailor is a good style tip, I think for me was terrific advice. And I would,
[Guest]: I'm grateful for it. And if you now look back, I'm sure we can all relate to the fact that, hey,
[Guest]: there was an alteration tailor in my life who made a difference.
[Guest]: And maybe you want to make sure you still have that person. You know, it's, it's, it's never,
[Guest]: we're never finished products in that sense. And it's a great idea to say,
[Guest]: I have an alteration tailor who will help me to identify what are those small tweaks that need to
[Guest]: be made and who will help me to get it right. So that was really the story around the alteration.
[Guest]: That's a lovely thought and a lovely phrase behind it. And I'm just thinking aloud that
[Amit Varma]: the kind of alteration tailor that I need right now is really a gym instructor.
[Amit Varma]: Who can make me fit my clothes, rather than make my clothes fit me. This lockdown has really,
[Amit Varma]: you know, some of us have expanded in unexpected ways. You know, I've taken,
[Amit Varma]: I took copious notes on your books, but if we go through all of them, we'll take like,
[Amit Varma]: you know, another three hours just to get through the insights. And I would rather that people
[Amit Varma]: listening to this go out and buy the book and sort of learn from it themselves. I mean, in a sense,
[Amit Varma]: I'm just thinking aloud, you are an alteration tailor. You are an alteration tailor.
[Amit Varma]: You are an alteration tailor for so many ways at scale, you know, in a remote kind of way,
[Amit Varma]: sharing these sort of insights, which is wonderful. So you know, there are plenty of
[Amit Varma]: insights in your book, which are great for personal growth, which are great for leadership,
[Amit Varma]: building teams, you know, making better decisions, all of those things. I'll leave it to the readers
[Amit Varma]: to head over to the book and discover that they've got a taste of it. I'll end with two
[Amit Varma]: final questions. And one is that something that I spoke about in my last episode with Roshan is how
[Amit Varma]: we live in this brave new world for creators. And for some of us, certainly for me, I realized so
[Amit Varma]: much more of this after the pandemic happened, where serendipitously, you know, I started the
[Amit Varma]: course and I started consuming much more content that creators were putting up on YouTube and
[Amit Varma]: elsewhere. And just the way the possibilities had expanded, and you know, the landscape had changed,
[Amit Varma]: all of it kind of blew my mind. Now you are a creator yourself. You're a creator in the sense
[Amit Varma]: that you've done these books, you've created these courses, you've got a YouTube channel,
[Amit Varma]: so on and so forth, incredibly exciting times. And so so for you, while you might look back to mine,
[Amit Varma]: what has happened in your life for content, a lot more of it is basically just going to
[Amit Varma]: be looking forward because hey, it's so exciting. Tell me a little bit about this.
[Amit Varma]: You know, what do you think of this new landscape for creators from a personal point of view from
[Amit Varma]: the things that you are going to do and that you're looking forward to?
[Guest]: Oh, I completely agree with you. I think these are exciting times for creators. I think the
[Guest]: opportunities, the platforms available, it's become so much easier to do stuff.
[Guest]: And you don't have to be terribly tech-savvy or, you know, clued in or have the most expensive
[Guest]: equipment to do stuff. I think very simple tools can help you to kind of produce. And
[Guest]: I think it's truly exciting times. What fascinates me is, of course, you know, I'm super excited
[Guest]: about the next 60 years of my life. I think there is so much to do. I'd love to write a lot more.
[Guest]: I'm only half, not even halfway through Ali Abdaal's recommendation as far as YouTube,
[Guest]: you know, videos are concerned. But I'm super excited by that. And I just think that
[Guest]: it comes back to you in several ways. And there are times when I do something and I figure that
[Guest]: it hasn't really, you know, I think it's a great idea and it just doesn't work.
[Guest]: And there's something else that I talked about. And suddenly you'll find that your
[Guest]: neighbor, neighboring auntie is sending it to you on WhatsApp saying, you know, my son in the US
[Guest]: sent it to me and I told him that I know this man. Why? Because that little video was so
[Guest]: viral and has a life of its own. Now, I think it's just fascinating to see how this might happen,
[Guest]: what it might do. And I think it tells you that, look, just do it. Put out that video. You never
[Guest]: know what might happen with it. Something else that I've tried to do, and you must check this
[Guest]: out, I must say, I try to say that, hey, is there an opportunity to reach out to more people,
[Guest]: and not for any other reason, but to say that, look, maybe there are other people out there
[Guest]: who need to hear this. And how can I reach them? So I tried to do a chai with pie, which is the
[Guest]: video that I do on YouTube in Hindi. And I just loved it. And I could worry about how many views
[Guest]: will I get. And it's not as if suddenly, you know, I've hit gold dust or any such thing. But I think
[Guest]: I suddenly touched different people. And there are another set of people saying, you know,
[Guest]: that they liked it. And maybe there's an opportunity here to say, look, I could do
[Guest]: something over here. I've learned, I, like I said, I learned, I signed up to learn writing in your
[Guest]: writing course, which I loved. I signed up for a standup comedy course. And I just think that,
[Guest]: you know, that's another place where you have this ability to look at something and find another
[Guest]: meaning to it. You take people down one path and take them, suddenly take them somewhere else.
[Guest]: And, you know, in some ways I think it's similar and maybe that's something else.
[Guest]: So I wouldn't be, you know, I wouldn't bet against myself. And maybe a year from now,
[Guest]: maybe two, you'll probably find something else. And I think that's another place where
[Guest]: you'll probably find something else happening as far as I'm concerned. I'd like something else
[Guest]: that you've mentioned, and I'm mindful of it, which is, you know, there's only so much that
[Guest]: I want to do in terms of mining from the past. Because, you know, there is only so much that
[Guest]: is, but I do think that there is so much I learn about, I see around me every day. And there's so
[Guest]: much to learn and so much to kind of make sense out of. And therefore, what I see is, what do I
[Guest]: see my role? It's not to say that, you know what, I was working in this organization, I learned
[Guest]: something and here's what I want to share. That's maybe one part of it. Maybe it's a bit of it is
[Guest]: done. What I really want to do is to try and say, let me try and make this simple for you to
[Guest]: understand. Here's a powerful lesson, but let me try and tell it to you in a manner that you will
[Guest]: remember, in a manner that you will relate to. And to me, that becomes then the role that I see
[Guest]: myself playing. This is not about saying, look, everybody, look, I've done it. That's never been
[Guest]: the intent. I don't think I've, and I've not done half the things that a lot of successful people in
[Guest]: the corporate world have done. So I can't even lay claim to that. But what I try and do is to say,
[Guest]: hey, here's something simple, you know, it's important. And let me explain it to you in a
[Guest]: manner which you will relate to. And there is so much that's happening in our world now,
[Guest]: which still needs for someone to try and make sense of and make simple sense of, in a sense,
[Guest]: to make it easy to understand, make it easy to remember, and make it palatable to say that
[Guest]: I'm not here to tell you that this is how you should succeed in life. Or if this is the creator
[Guest]: economy, here are the five rules to succeed. That's not what I want to do. But I want to try
[Guest]: and make it intuitive, try and say, here's something simple. Maybe it struck you, maybe it
[Guest]: didn't. But you know, if you, if this kind of gets into your head, it might find residence there,
[Guest]: and it might change the way you think. It might change the way you look at the world. And for me,
[Guest]: I think that is perhaps the biggest piece here, which is that a lot of times, what you need to
[Guest]: change is not to tell people how to do it, and here's how you do it, but to get them to think
[Guest]: differently about it. And often it could be to say, you can do it, which sounds like such a boring
[Guest]: motivation line, you know, you can do it and all of that. But I think it's simply to say,
[Guest]: we all tend to think of our limitations, we tend to think of why it can't be done,
[Guest]: we tend to think of what's wrong with the world and why it would prevent me from doing it.
[Guest]: And if you do that, what happens is that you, you know, very soon you become a fabulous lawyer
[Guest]: for that and you build such a strong case that they win. And you end up saying, oh, you know,
[Guest]: I could have been the guy who did it, I could have achieved so much if this was a different world.
[Guest]: But you know what, the world is what it is, you can change and you can make things happen. And
[Guest]: I think just reclaiming the power, which is what I think the creator economy is doing in many ways,
[Guest]: is helping people reclaim the power to make a difference. And I think it's there for all of us
[Amit Varma]: to claim. Yeah, exactly. Inspiring words. And one of the things that I keep pointing out to,
[Amit Varma]: you know, everyone who signs up for my writing course is that there are some things which
[Amit Varma]: require natural talent. Like if you want to be a fast bowler, you've got to have fast twitch
[Amit Varma]: muscles, a batsman will need some hand-eye coordination. But for a writer, I don't believe
[Amit Varma]: that you need any natural talent at all. I think anyone can learn to write. It's just a question
[Amit Varma]: of hard work, applying yourself, you know, having the right approach to writing. And that's again
[Amit Varma]: something that you just sort of spoke about, that people don't know how far their own capacities
[Amit Varma]: can extend if they just have the right mindset. So more power to you for, you know, achieving all
[Amit Varma]: of these things. My final question and almost a predictable one is that, you know, listeners of
[Amit Varma]: my show are always hungry for book recommendations. Now, you have written books which some people
[Amit Varma]: would say have touched their lives or even changed them and so on. If I were to throw the onus back
[Amit Varma]: on you, that what are the books that, you know, maybe changed the way you think about the world
[Amit Varma]: or meant a lot to you or that you learned from or that you're simply so enthusiastic about that
[Amit Varma]: you are like, I have to share this with the world. You know, do you have any recommendations?
[Guest]: So I'm a big fan of Malcolm Gladwell. I love his storytelling style and his ability to pull
[Guest]: together strands of research from, you know, from all kinds of places and then suddenly magically
[Guest]: weave them into a narrative. So I'm a big fan of his writing, his podcasts, and I'd highly
[Guest]: recommend Malcolm Gladwell to people. And maybe I also like the idea of, you know,
[Guest]: writing not because of, not only for the manner in which it's been put together, but for the idea
[Guest]: there. And I think it's so well done that you forget to look at the writing. And, you know,
[Guest]: this is something I know, Amit, you put very eloquently, W and not the WP, you know,
[Guest]: window and not the window pane. And I think that's something that's such a powerful idea where you
[Guest]: don't try and draw attention to the writing, but you try and look at the ideas over there.
[Guest]: So I'm a big fan of Malcolm Gladwell. I love his writing style. I love the way he
[Guest]: so I'm a big fan of this half psychology, half in, you know, so Dan Arely, for example,
[Guest]: big fan of the kind of stuff that he writes.
[Amit Varma]: Though he's gotten into trouble recently, you read about that in the sort of the data in his
[Amit Varma]: research. Anyway, the jury's out on whose fault exactly it is, but it's a lot of these behavioral
[Amit Varma]: psychology experiments have turned out to not be replicable. But anyway, I think even the ones that
[Amit Varma]: aren't replicable point to interesting core insights that one should at least think about.
[Guest]: That's right. That's right. And I'll tell you something else. As a kid growing up,
[Guest]: one of my favorite writers was Busy Bee.
[Guest]: You know, Behram Contractor, who would write this little piece in the afternoon papers at
[Guest]: that time. And for me, that's a great inspiration because this ability to look at something small
[Guest]: around you and make sense out of it and to try and make it interesting and and to have a point of view, which I think is extremely important.
[Guest]: So for me, I like the idea that somebody is saying something out of whatever, whatever is being
[Guest]: written. There is a point of view that's coming through. It is not always profound. It is often
[Guest]: built on something which is very simple, everyday stuff. And yet it makes you look at it and say,
[Guest]: how come I didn't think of that one? You know, and that to me is in itself very, very interesting.
[Amit Varma]: Great. So, Prakash, thanks so much for your time and your insights and indeed for writing these
[Amit Varma]: books and all of that. I hope we continue to have many more conversations through the next 60 years,
[Amit Varma]: you said, right? So through the next 60 years, since you're optimistic for a moment, I shall
[Guest]: adopt some of that optimism for myself. Like that line went, why are you surprised?
[Guest]: Amit, you look pretty fit. Yeah, you'll survive the next 60. Don't worry.
[Amit Varma]: Well, inshallah. So, aapke moonme ghee Pepsi.
[Guest]: Yeah. Thank you so much, Amit. It's been so much fun talking to you. It's been so much fun following
[Guest]: you. And may you continue to inspire a lot more people to write, indeed to follow their passions
[Guest]: and do all the cool stuff that you do. Thank you so much, Amit. Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, head on over to your nearest bookstore online or offline
[Amit Varma]: and buy How Come No One Told Me That by Prakash Iyer. In fact, just buy all his books.
[Amit Varma]: They're full of important life lessons. Also check out the show notes and enter rabbit holes at will.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow Prakash on Twitter at Prakash Iyer, one word. You can follow me at Amit Verma,
[Amit Varma]: A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A. You can browse past episodes of The Scene and The Unseen at sceneunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening.